THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE


St. Luke was a native of Antioch, the capital of Syria. He was by
profession a physician; and some ancient writers say, that he was very
skillful in painting. He was converted by St. Paul and became his
disciple and companion in his travels, and fellow-labourer in the
ministry of the Gospel. He wrote in Greek, about twenty-four years
after our Lord’s Ascension.


Luke Chapter 1

The conception of John the Baptist, and of Christ. The visitation and
canticle of the Blessed Virgin. The birth of the Baptist and the
canticle of Zachary.

1:1. Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
narration of the things that have been accomplished among us,

1:2. According as they have delivered them unto us, who from the
beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word:

1:3. It seemed good to me also, having diligently attained to all
things from the beginning, to write to thee in order, most excellent
Theophilus,

1:4. That thou mayest know the verity of those words in which thou hast
been instructed.

1:5. There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain
priest named Zachary, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the
daughters of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth.

Of the course of Abia.... that is, of the rank of Abia, which word in
the Greek is commonly put for the employment of one day: but here for
the functions of a whole week. For, by the appointment of David, 1 Par.
24., the descendants from Aaron were divided into twenty-four families,
of which the eighth was Abia, from whom descended this Zachary, who at
this time was in the week of his priestly functions.

1:6. And they were both just before God, walking in all the
commandments and justifications of the Lord without blame.

1:7. And they had no son, for that Elizabeth was barren: and they both
were well advanced in years.

1:8. And it came to pass, when he executed the priestly function in the
order of his course before God,

1:9. According to the custom of the priestly office, it was his lot to
offer incense, going into the temple of the Lord.

1:10. And all the multitude of the people was praying without, at the
hour of incense.

1:11. And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord, standing on the
right side of the altar of incense.

1:12. And Zachary seeing him, was troubled: and fear fell upon him.

1:13. But the angel said to him: Fear not, Zachary, for thy prayer is
heard: and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son. And thou shalt
call his name John.

1:14. And thou shalt have joy and gladness: and many shall rejoice in
his nativity.

1:15. For he shall be great before the Lord and shall drink no wine nor
strong drink: and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his
mother’s womb.

1:16. And he shall convert many of the children of Israel to the Lord
their God.

1:17. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias: that
he may turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children and the
incredulous to the wisdom of the just, to prepare unto the Lord a
perfect people.

1:18. And Zachary said to the angel: Whereby shall I know this? For I
am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years.

1:19. And the angel answering, said to him: I am Gabriel, who stand
before God and am sent to speak to thee and to bring thee these good
tidings.

1:20. And behold, thou shalt be dumb and shalt not be able to speak
until the day wherein these things shall come to pass: because thou
hast not believed my words, which shall be fulfilled in their time.

1:21. And the people were waiting for Zachary: and they wondered that
he tarried so long in the temple.

1:22. And when he came out, he could not speak to them: and they
understood that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he made signs
to them and remained dumb.

1:23. And it came to pass, after the days of his office were
accomplished, he departed to his own house.

1:24. And after those days, Elizabeth his wife conceived and hid
herself five months, saying:

1:25. Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he hath had
regard to take away my reproach among men.

1:26. And in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God into
a city of Galilee, called Nazareth,

1:27. To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house
of David: and the virgin’s name was Mary.

1:28. And the angel being come in, said unto her: Hail, full of grace,
the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

1:29. Who having heard, was troubled at his saying and thought with
herself what manner of salutation this should be.

1:30. And the angel said to her: Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found
grace with God.

1:31. Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb and shalt bring forth a
son: and thou shalt call his name Jesus.

1:32. He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the Most High.
And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of David his father:
and he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever.

1:33. And of his kingdom there shall be no end.

1:34. And Mary said to the angel: How shall this be done, because I
know not man?

1:35. And the angel answering, said to her: The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee. And
therefore also the Holy which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God.

1:36. And behold thy cousin Elizabeth, she also hath conceived a son in
her old age: and this is the sixth month with her that is called
barren.

1:37. Because no word shall be impossible with God.

1:38. And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord: be it done to me
according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.

1:39. And Mary rising up in those days, went into the hill country with
haste into a city of Juda.

1:40. And she entered into the house of Zachary and saluted Elizabeth.

1:41. And it came to pass that when Elizabeth heard the salutation of
Mary, the infant leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost.

1:42. And she cried out with a loud voice and said: Blessed art thou
among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

1:43. And whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come
to me?

1:44. For behold as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my
ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.

1:45. And blessed art thou that hast believed, because those things
shall be accomplished that were spoken to thee by the Lord.

1:46. And Mary said: My soul doth magnify the Lord.

1:47. And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

1:48. Because he hath regarded the humility of his handmaid: for behold
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Shall call me blessed.... These words are a prediction of that honour
which the church in all ages should pay to the Blessed Virgin. Let
Protestants examine whether they are any way concerned in this
prophecy.

1:49. Because he that is mighty hath done great things to me: and holy
is his name.

1:50. And his mercy is from generation unto generations, to them that
fear him.

1:51. He hath shewed might in his arm: he hath scattered the proud in
the conceit of their heart.

1:52. He hath put down the mighty from their seat and hath exalted the
humble.

1:53. He hath filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he hath
sent empty away.

1:54. He hath received Israel his servant, being mindful of his mercy.

1:55. As he spoke to our fathers: to Abraham and to his seed for ever.

1:56. And Mary abode with her about three months. And she returned to
her own house.

1:57. Now Elizabeth’s full time of being delivered was come: and she
brought forth a son.

1:58. And her neighbors and kinsfolks heard that the Lord had shewed
his great mercy towards her: and they congratulated with her.

1:59. And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to
circumcise the child: and they called him by his father’s name Zachary.

1:60. And his mother answering, said: Not so. But he shall be called
John.

1:61. And they said to her: There is none of thy kindred that is called
by this name.

1:62. And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.

1:63. And demanding a writing table, he wrote, saying: John is his
name. And they all wondered.

1:64. And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed: and
he spoke, blessing God.

1:65. And fear came upon all their neighbours: and all these things
were noised abroad over all the hill country of Judea.

1:66. And all they that had heard them laid them up in their heart,
saying: What an one, think ye, shall this child be? For the hand of the
Lord was with him.

1:67. And Zachary his father was filled with the Holy Ghost. And he
prophesied, saying:

1:68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: because he hath visited and
wrought the redemption of his people.

1:69. And hath raised up an horn of salvation to us, in the house of
David his servant.

Horn of salvation.... That is, A powerful salvation, as Dr. Witham
translates it. For in the Scripture, by horn is generally understood
strength and power.

1:70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, who are from the
beginning.

1:71. Salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all that hate us.

1:72. To perform mercy to our fathers and to remember his holy
testament.

1:73. The oath, which he swore to Abraham our father, that he would
grant to us.

1:74. That being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we may serve
him without fear:

1:75. In holiness and justice before him, all our days.

1:76. And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for
thou shalt, go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways:

1:77. To give knowledge of salvation to his people, unto the remission
of their sins.

1:78. Through the bowels of the mercy of our God, in which the Orient
from on high hath visited us:

The Orient.... It is one of the titles of the Messias, the true light
of the world, and the sun of justice.

1:79. To enlighten them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death: to direct our feet into the way of peace.

1:80. And the child grew and was strengthened in spirit: and was in the
deserts until the day of his manifestation to Israel.


Luke Chapter 2

The birth of Christ. His presentation in the temple. Simeon’s prophecy.
Christ at twelve years of age, is found amongst the doctors.

2:1. And it came to pass that in those days there went out a decree
from Caesar Augustus that the whole world should be enrolled.

2:2. This enrolling was first made by Cyrinus, the governor of Syria.

2:3. And all went to be enrolled, every one into his own city.

2:4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem: because he
was of the house and family of David.

2:5. To be enrolled with Mary his espoused wife, who was with child.

2:6. And it came to pass that when they were there, her days were
accomplished that she should be delivered.

2:7. And she brought forth her first born son and wrapped him up in
swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger: because there was no room
for them in the inn.

Her firstborn.... The meaning is, not that she had afterward any other
child; but it is a way of speech among the Hebrews, to call them also
the firstborn, who are the only children. See annotation Matt. 1. 25.

2:8. And there were in the same country shepherds watching and keeping
the night watches over their flock.

2:9. And behold an angel of the Lord stood by them and the brightness
of God shone round about them: and they feared with a great fear.

2:10. And the angel said to them: Fear not; for, behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy that shall be to all the people:

2:11. For, this day is born to you a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord,
in the city of David.

2:12. And this shall be a sign unto you. You shall find the infant
wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger.

2:13. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
army, praising God and saying:

2:14. Glory to God in the highest: and on earth peace to men of good
will.

2:15. And it came to pass, after the angels departed from them into
heaven, the shepherds said one to another: Let us go over to Bethlehem
and let us see this word that is come to pass, which the Lord hath
shewed to us.

2:16. And they came with haste: and they found Mary and Joseph, and the
infant lying in the manger.

2:17. And seeing, they understood of the word that had been spoken to
them concerning this child.

2:18. And all that heard wondered: and at those things that were told
them by the shepherds.

2:19. But Mary kept all these words, pondering them in her heart.

2:20. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all
the things they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

2:21. And after eight days were accomplished, that the child should be
circumcised, his name was called JESUS, which was called by the angel
before he was conceived in the womb.

2:22. And after the days of her purification, according to the law of
Moses, were accomplished, they carried him to Jerusalem, to present him
to the Lord:

2:23. As it is written in the law of the Lord: Every male opening the
womb shall be called holy to the Lord:

2:24. And to offer a sacrifice, according as it is written in the law
of the Lord, a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons:

2:25. And behold there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon: and this
man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel. And the
Holy Ghost was in him.

2:26. And he had received an answer from the Holy Ghost, that he should
not see death before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.

2:27. And he came by the Spirit into the temple. And when his parents
brought in the child Jesus, to do for him according to the custom of
the law,

2:28. He also took him into his arms and blessed God and said

2:29. Now thou dost dismiss thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word
in peace:

2:30. Because my eyes have seen thy salvation,

2:31. Which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples:

2:32. A light to the revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy
people Israel.

2:33. And his father and mother were wondering at those things which
were spoken concerning him.

2:34. And Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother: Behold this
child is set for the fall and for the resurrection of many in Israel
and for a sign which shall be contradicted.

For the fall, etc.... Christ came for the salvation of all men; but
here Simeon prophesies what would come to pass, that many through their
own wilful blindness and obstinacy would not believe in Christ, nor
receive his doctrine, which therefore would be ruin to them: but to
others a resurrection, by their believing in him, and obeying his
commandments.

2:35. And thy own soul a sword shall pierce, that, out of many hearts
thoughts may be revealed.

2:36. And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Aser. She was far advanced in years and had lived with her
husband seven years from her virginity.

2:37. And she was a widow until fourscore and four years: who departed
not from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving night and day.

2:38. Now she, at the same hour, coming in, confessed to the Lord: and
spoke of him to all that looked for the redemption of Israel.

2:39. And after they had performed all things according to the law of
the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their city Nazareth.

2:40. And the child grew and waxed strong, full of wisdom: and the
grace of God was in him.

2:41. And his parents went every year to Jerusalem, at the solemn day
of the pasch.

2:42. And when he was twelve years old, they going up into Jerusalem,
according to the custom of the feast,

2:43. And having fulfilled the days, when they returned, the child
Jesus remained in Jerusalem. And his parents knew it not.

2:44. And thinking that he was in the company, they came a day’s
journey and sought him among their kinsfolks and acquaintance.

2:45. And not finding him, they returned into Jerusalem, seeking him.

2:46. And it came to pass, that, after three days, they found him in
the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, hearing them and
asking them questions.

2:47. And all that heard him were astonished at his wisdom and his
answers.

2:48. And seeing him, they wondered. And his mother said to him: Son,
why hast thou done so to us? Behold thy father and I have sought thee
sorrowing.

2:49. And he said to them: How is it that you sought me? Did you not
know that I must be about my father’s business?

2:50. And they understood not the word that he spoke unto them.

2:51. And he went down with them and came to Nazareth and was subject
to them. And his mother kept all these words in her heart.

2:52. And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age and grace with God and men.


Luke Chapter 3

John’s mission and preaching. Christ is baptized by him.

3:1. Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee,
and Philip his brother tetrarch of Iturea and the country of
Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilina:

3:2. Under the high priests Annas and Caiphas: the word of the Lord was
made unto John, the son of Zachary, in the desert.

3:3. And he came into all the country about the Jordan, preaching the
baptism of penance for the remission of sins.

3:4. As it was written in the book of the sayings of Isaias the
prophet: A voice of one crying in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make straight his paths.

3:5. Every valley shall be filled and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways
plain.

3:6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

3:7. He said therefore to the multitudes that went forth to be baptized
by him: Ye offspring of vipers, who hath shewed you to flee from the
wrath to come?

3:8. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of penance: and do not begin
to say, We have Abraham for our father. For I say unto you that God is
able of these stones, to raise up children to Abraham.

3:9. For now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree
therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down and cast
into the fire.

3:10. And the people asked him, saying: What then shall we do?

3:11. And he answering, said to them: He that hath two coats, let him
give to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do in like
manner.

3:12. And the publicans also came to be baptized and said to him:
Master, what shall we do?

3:13. But he said to them: Do nothing more than that which is appointed
you.

3:14. And the soldiers also asked him, saying: And what shall we do?
And he said to them: Do violence to no man, neither calumniate any man;
and be content with your pay.

3:15. And as the people were of opinion, and all were thinking in their
hearts of John, that perhaps he might be the Christ:

3:16. John answered, saying unto all: I indeed baptize you with water:
but there shall come one mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I
am not worthy to loose. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire;

3:17. Whose fan is in his hand: and he will purge his floor and will
gather the wheat into his barn: but the chaff he will burn with
unquenchable fire.

3:18. And many other things exhorting did he preach to the people.

3:19. But Herod the tetrarch, when he was reproved by him for Herodias,
his brother’s wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done:

3:20. He added this also above all and shut up John in prison.

3:21. Now it came to pass, when all the people were baptized, that
Jesus also being baptized and praying, heaven was opened.

3:22. And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, as a dove, upon
him. And a voice came from heaven: Thou art my beloved Son. In thee I
am well pleased.

3:23. And Jesus himself was beginning about the age of thirty years:
being (as it was supposed) the son of Joseph, who was of Heli, who was
of Mathat,

Who was of Heli.... St. Joseph, who by nature was the son of Jacob,
(St. Matt. 1. 16,) in the account of the law, was son of Heli. For Heli
and Jacob were brothers, by the same mother; and Heli, who was the
elder, dying without issue, Jacob, as the law directed, married his
widow: in consequence of such marriage, his son Joseph was reputed in
the law the son of Heli.

3:24. Who was of Levi, who was of Melchi, who was of Janne, who was of
Joseph,

3:25. Who was of Mathathias, who was of Amos, who was of Nahum, who was
of Hesli, who was of Nagge,

3:26. Who was of Mahath, who was of Mathathias, who was of Semei, who
was of Joseph, who was of Juda,

3:27. Who was of Joanna, who was of Reza, who was of Zorobabel, who was
of Salathiel, who was of Neri,

3:28. Who was of Melchi, who was of Addi, who was of Cosan, who was of
Helmadan, who was of Her,

3:29. Who was of Jesus, who was of Eliezer, who was of Jorim, who was
of Mathat, who was of Levi,

3:30. Who was of Simeon, who was of Judas, who was of Joseph, who was
of Jona, who was of Eliakim,

3:31. Who was of Melea, who was of Menna, who was of Mathatha, who was
of Nathan, who was of David,

3:32. Who was of Jesse, who was of Obed, who was of Booz, who was of
Salmon, who was of Naasson,

3:33. Who was of Aminadab, who was of Aram, who was of Esron, who was
of Phares, who was of Judas,

3:34. Who was of Jacob, who was of Isaac, who was of Abraham, who was
of Thare, who was of Nachor,

3:35. Who was of Sarug, who was of Ragau, who was of Phaleg, who was of
Heber, who was of Sale,

3:36. Who was of Cainan, who was of Arphaxad, who was of Sem, who was
of Noe, who was of Lamech,

3:37. Who was of Mathusale, who was of Henoch, who was of Jared, who
was of Malaleel, who was of Cainan,

3:38. Who was of Henos, who was of Seth, who was of Adam, who was of
God.


Luke Chapter 4

Christ’s fasting and temptation. He is persecuted in Nazareth. His
miracles in Capharnaum.

4:1. And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from the Jordan
and was led by the spirit into the desert,

4:2. For the space of forty days, and was tempted by the devil. And he
ate nothing in those days. And when they were ended, he was hungry.

4:3. And the devil said to him: If thou be the Son of God, say to this
stone that it be made bread.

4:4. And Jesus answered him: It is written that Man liveth not by bread
alone, but by every word of God.

4:5. And the devil led him into a high mountain and shewed him all the
kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.

4:6. And he said to him: To thee will I give all this power and the
glory of them. For to me they are delivered: and to whom I will, I give
them.

4:7. If thou therefore wilt adore before me, all shall be thine.

4:8. And Jesus answering said to him. It is written: Thou shalt adore
the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.

4:9. And he brought him to Jerusalem and set him on a pinnacle of the
temple and said to him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself from
hence.

4:10. For it is written that He hath given his angels charge over thee
that they keep thee.

4:11. And that in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest perhaps
thou dash thy foot against a stone.

4:12. And Jesus answering, said to him: It is said: Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God.

4:13. And all the temptation being ended, the devil departed from him
for a time.

4:14. And Jesus returned in the power of the spirit, into Galilee: and
the fame of him went out through the whole country.

4:15. And he taught in their synagogues and was magnified by all.

4:16. And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up: and he went
into the synagogue, according to his custom, on the sabbath day: and he
rose up to read.

4:17. And the book of Isaias the prophet was delivered unto him. And as
he unfolded the book, he found the place where it was written:

4:18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me. Wherefore he hath anointed me
to preach the gospel to the poor, he hath sent me to heal the contrite
of heart,

4:19. To preach deliverance to the captives and sight to the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of
the Lord and the day of reward.

4:20. And when he had folded the book, he restored it to the minister
and sat down. And the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him.

4:21. And he began to say to them: This day is fulfilled this scripture
in your ears.

4:22. And all gave testimony to him. And they wondered at the words of
grace that proceeded from his mouth. And they said: Is not this the son
of Joseph?

4:23. And he said to them: Doubtless you will say to me this
similitude: Physician, heal thyself. As great things as we have heard
done in Capharnaum, do also here in thy own country.

4:24. And he said: Amen I say to you that no prophet is accepted in his
own country.

4:25. In truth I say to you, there were many widows in the days of
Elias in Israel, when heaven was shut up three years and six months,
when there was a great famine throughout all the earth.

4:26. And to none of them was Elias sent, but to Sarepta of Sidon, to a
widow woman.

4:27. And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Eliseus the
prophet: and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian.

4:28. And all they in the synagogue, hearing these things, were filled
with anger.

4:29. And they rose up and thrust him out of the city: and they brought
him to the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they
might cast him down headlong.

4:30. But he passing through the midst of them, went his way.

4:31. And he went down into Capharnaum, a city of Galilee: and there he
taught them on the sabbath days.

4:32. And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his speech was with
power.

4:33. And in the synagogue there was a man who had an unclean devil:
and he cried out with a loud voice,

4:34. Saying: Let us alone. What have we to do with thee, Jesus of
Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the
holy one of God.

4:35. And Jesus rebuked him, saying: Hold thy peace and go out of him.
And when the devil had thrown him into the midst, he went out of him
and hurt him not at all.

4:36. And there came fear upon all; and they talked among themselves,
saying: What word is this, for with authority and power he commandeth
the unclean spirits, and they go out?

4:37. And the fame of him was published into every place of the
country.

4:38. And Jesus rising up out of the synagogue, went into Simon’s
house. And Simon’s wife’s mother was taken with a great fever: and they
besought him for her.

4:39. And standing over her, he commanded the fever: and it left her.
And immediately rising, she ministered to them.

4:40. And when the sun was down, all they that had any sick with divers
diseases brought them to him. But he, laying his hands on every one of
them, healed them.

4:41. And devils went out from many, crying out and saying: Thou art
the son of God. And rebuking them he suffered them not to speak; for
they knew that he was Christ.

4:42. And when it was day, going out he went into a desert place: and
the multitudes sought him, and came unto him. And they stayed him that
he should not depart from them.

4:43. To whom he said: To other cities also I must preach the kingdom
of God: for therefore am I sent.

4:44. And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.


Luke Chapter 5

The miraculous draught of fishes. The cure of the leper and of the
paralytic. The call of Matthew.

5:1. And it came to pass, that when the multitudes pressed upon him to
hear the word of God, he stood by the lake of Genesareth,

5:2. And saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were
gone out of them and were washing their nets.

5:3. And going into one of the ships that was Simon’s, he desired him
to draw back a little from the land. And sitting, he taught the
multitudes out of the ship.

5:4. Now when he had ceased to speak, he said to Simon: Launch out into
the deep and let down your nets for a draught.

5:5. And Simon answering said to him: Master, we have laboured all the
night and have taken nothing: but at thy word I will let down the net.

5:6. And when they had done this, they enclosed a very great multitude
of fishes: and their net broke.

5:7. And they beckoned to their partners that were in the other ship,
that they should come and help them. And they came and filled both the
ships, so that they were almost sinking.

5:8. Which when Simon Peter saw, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying:
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

5:9. For he was wholly astonished, and all that were with him, at the
draught of the fishes which they had taken.

5:10. And so were also James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were
Simon’s partners. And Jesus saith to Simon: Fear not: from henceforth
thou shalt catch men.

5:11. And having brought their ships to land, leaving all things, they
followed him.

5:12. And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man
full of leprosy who, seeing Jesus and falling on his face, besought him
saying: Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

5:13. And stretching forth his hand, he touched him, saying: I will. Be
thou cleansed. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.

5:14. And he charged him that he should tell no man, but: Go, shew
thyself to the priest and offer for thy cleansing according as Moses
commanded, for a testimony to them.

5:15. But the fame of him went abroad the more: and great multitudes
came together to hear and to be healed by him of their infirmities.

5:16. And he retired into the desert; and prayed.

5:17. And it came to pass on a certain day, as he sat teaching, that
there were also Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, that were
come out of every town of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem: and the
power of the Lord was to heal them.

5:18. And behold, men brought in a bed a man who had the palsy: and
they sought means to bring him in and to lay him before him.

5:19. And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in,
because of the multitude, they went up upon the roof and let him down
through the tiles with his bed into the midst before Jesus.

5:20. Whose faith when he saw, he said: Man, thy sins are forgiven
thee.

5:21. And the scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying: Who is this
who speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?

5:22. And when Jesus knew their thoughts, answering he said to them:
What is it you think in your hearts?

5:23. Which is easier to say: Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say:
Arise and walk?

5:24. But that you may know that the Son of man hath the power on earth
to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy), I say to thee,
Arise, take up thy bed and go into thy house.

5:25. And immediately rising up before them, he took up the bed on
which he lay: and he went away to his own house, glorifying God.

5:26. And all were astonished: and they glorified God. And they were
filled with fear, saying: We have seen wonderful things to-day.

5:27. And after these things, he went forth and saw a publican named
Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said to him: Follow me.

5:28. And leaving all things, he rose up and followed him.

5:29. And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: And there was a
great company of publicans and of others that were at table with them.

5:30. But the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying to his disciples:
Why do you eat and drink with publicans and sinners?

5:31. And Jesus answering, said to them: They that are whole need not
the physician: but they that are sick.

5:32. I came not to call the just, but sinners to penance.

5:33. And they said to him: Why do the disciples of John fast often and
make prayers, and the disciples of the Pharisees in like manner; but
thine eat and drink?

5:34. To whom he said: Can you make the children of the bridegroom fast
whilst the bridegroom is with them?

5:35. But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them: then shall they fast in those days.

5:36. And he spoke also a similitude to them: That no man putteth a
piece from a new garment upon an old garment: otherwise he both rendeth
the new, and the piece taken from the new agreeth not with the old.

5:37. And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: otherwise the new
wine will break the bottles; and it will be spilled and the bottles
will be lost.

5:38. But new wine must be put into new bottles: and both are
preserved.

5:39. And no man drinking old hath presently a mind to new: for he
saith: The old is better.


Luke Chapter 6

Christ excuses his disciples. He cures upon the sabbath day, chooses
the twelve and makes a sermon to them.

6:1. And it came to pass on the second first sabbath that, as he went
through the corn fields, his disciples plucked the ears and did eat,
rubbing them in their hands.

The second first sabbath.... Some understand this of the sabbath of
Pentecost, which was the second in course among the great feasts:
others, of a sabbath day that immediately followed any solemn feast.

6:2. And some of the Pharisees said to them: Why do you that which is
not lawful on the sabbath days?

6:3. And Jesus answering them, said: Have you not read so much as this,
what David did, when himself was hungry and they that were with him:

6:4. How he went into the house of God and took and ate the bread of
proposition and gave to them that were with him, which is not lawful to
eat but only for the priests?

6:5. And he said to them: The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

6:6. And it came to pass also, on another sabbath, that he entered into
the synagogue and taught. And there was a man whose right hand was
withered.

6:7. And the scribes and Pharisees watched if he would heal on the
sabbath: that they might find an accusation against him.

6:8. But he knew their thoughts and said to the man who had the
withered hand: Arise and stand forth in the midst. And rising he stood
forth.

6:9. Then Jesus said to them: I ask you, if it be lawful on the sabbath
days to do good or to do evil? To save life or to destroy?

6:10. And looking round about on them all, he said to the man: Stretch
forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth. And his hand was restored.

6:11. And they were filled with madness: and they talked one with
another, what they might do to Jesus.

6:12. And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray: and he passed the whole night in the prayer of God.

6:13. And when day was come, he called unto him his disciples: and he
chose twelve of them (whom also he named apostles):

6:14. Simon, whom he surnamed Peter, and Andrew his brother, James and
John, Philip and Bartholomew,

6:15. Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon who is
called Zelotes,

6:16. And Jude the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, who was the
traitor.

6:17. And coming down with them, he stood in a plain place: and the
company of his disciples and a very great multitude of people from all
Judea and Jerusalem and the sea coast, both of Tyre and Sidon,

6:18. Who were come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. And
they that were troubled with unclean spirits were cured.

6:19. And all the multitude sought to touch him: for virtue went out
from him and healed all.

6:20. And he, lifting up his eyes on his disciples, said: Blessed are
ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.

6:21. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for you shall be filled. Blessed
are ye that weep now: for you shall laugh.

6:22. Blessed shall you be when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you and shall reproach you and cast out your name as evil, for
the Son of man’s sake.

6:23. Be glad in that day and rejoice: for behold, your reward is great
in heaven, For according to these things did their fathers to the
prophets.

6:24. But woe to you that are rich: for you have your consolation.

6:25. Woe to you that are filled: for you shall hunger. Woe to you that
now laugh: for you shall mourn and weep.

6:26. Woe to you when men shall bless you: for according to these
things did their fathers to the false prophets.

6:27. But I say to you that hear: Love your enemies. Do good to them
that hate you.

6:28. Bless them that curse you and pray for them that calumniate you.

6:29. And to him that striketh thee on the one cheek, offer also the
other. And him that taketh away from thee thy cloak, forbid not to take
thy coat also.

6:30. Give to every one that asketh thee: and of him that taketh away
thy goods, ask them not again.

6:31. And as you would that men should do to you, do you also to them
in like manner.

6:32. And if you love them that love you, what thanks are to you? For
sinners also love those that love them.

6:33. And if you do good to them who do good to you, what thanks are to
you? For sinners also do this.

6:34. And if you lend to them of whom you hope to receive, what thanks
are to you? For sinners also lend to sinners, for to receive as much.

6:35. But love ye your enemies: do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
thereby: and your reward shall be great, and you shall be the sons of
the Highest. For he is kind to the unthankful and to the evil.

6:36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

6:37. Judge not: and you shall not be judged. Condemn not: and you
shall not be condemned. Forgive: and you shall be forgiven.

6:38. Give: and it shall be given to you: good measure and pressed down
and shaken together and running over shall they give into your bosom.
For with the same measure that you shall mete withal, it shall be
measured to you again.

6:39. And he spoke also to them a similitude: Can the blind lead the
blind? Do they not both fall into the ditch?

6:40. The disciple is not above his master: but every one shall be
perfect, if he be as his master.

6:41. And why seest thou the mote in thy brother’s eye: but the beam
that is in thy own eye thou considerest not?

6:42. Or how canst thou say to thy brother: Brother, let me pull the
mote out of thy eye, when thou thyself seest not the beam in thy own
eye? Hypocrite, cast first the beam out of thy own eye: and then shalt
thou see clearly to take out the mote from thy brother’s eye.

6:43. For there is no good tree that bringeth forth evil fruit: nor an
evil tree that bringeth forth good fruit.

6:44. For every tree is known by its fruit. For men do not gather figs
from thorns: nor from a bramble bush do they gather the grape.

6:45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth
that which is good: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth
forth that which is evil. For out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh.

6:46. And why call you me, Lord, Lord; and do not the things which I
say?

6:47. Every one that cometh to me and heareth my words and doth them, I
will shew you to whom he is like.

6:48. He is like to a man building a house, who digged deep and laid
the foundation upon a rock. And when a flood came, the stream beat
vehemently upon that house: and it could not shake it: for it was
founded on a rock.

6:49. But he that heareth and doth not is like to a man building his
house upon the earth without a foundation: against which the stream
beat vehemently. And immediately it fell: and the ruin of that house
was great.


Luke Chapter 7

Christ heals the centurion’s servant. He raises the widow’s son to
life, answers the messengers sent by John and absolves the penitent
sinner.

7:1. And when he had finished all his words in the hearing of the
people, he entered into Capharnaum.

7:2. And the servant of a certain centurion who was dear to him, being
sick, was ready to die.

7:3. And when he had heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the ancients of
the Jews, desiring him to come and heal his servant.

7:4. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him earnestly, saying
to him: He is worthy that thou shouldest do this for him.

7:5. For he loveth our nation: and he hath built us a synagogue.

7:6. And Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the
house, the centurion sent his friends to him, saying: Lord, trouble not
thyself; for I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof.

7:7. For which cause neither did I think myself worthy to come to thee:
but say the word, and my servant shall be healed.

7:8. For I also am a man subject to authority, having under me
soldiers: and I say to one, Go, and he goeth: and to another, Come, and
he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doth it.

7:9. Which Jesus hearing, marvelled: and turning about to the multitude
that followed him, he said: Amen I say to you, I have not found so
great faith, not even in Israel.

7:10. And they who were sent, being returned to the house, found the
servant whole who had been sick.

7:11. And it came to pass afterwards that he went into a city that is
called Naim: and there went with him his disciples and a great
multitude.

7:12. And when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold a dead man
was carried out, the only son of his mother: and she was a widow. And a
great multitude of the city was with her.

7:13. Whom when the Lord had seen, being moved with mercy towards her,
he said to her: Weep not.

7:14. And he came near and touched the bier. And they that carried it
stood still. And he said: Young man, I say to thee, arise.

7:15. And he that was dead sat up and began to speak. And he gave him
to his mother.

7:16. And there came a fear upon them all: and they glorified God
saying: A great prophet is risen up among us: and, God hath visited his
people.

7:17. And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judea and
throughout all the country round about.

7:18. And John’s disciples told him of all these things.

7:19. And John called to him two of his disciples and sent them to
Jesus, saying: Art thou he that art to come? Or look we for another?

7:20. And when the men were come unto him, they said: John the Baptist
hath sent us to thee, saying: Art thou he that art to come? Or look we
for another?

7:21. (And in that same hour, he cured many of their diseases and hurts
and evil spirits: and to many that were blind he gave sight.)

7:22. And answering, he said to them: Go and relate to John what you
have heard and seen: the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are made
clean, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, to the poor the gospel is
preached.

7:23. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be scandalized in me.

7:24. And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak
to the multitudes concerning John. What went ye out into the desert to
see? A reed shaken with the wind?

7:25. But what went you out to see? A man clothed in soft garments?
Behold they that are in costly apparel and live delicately are in the
houses of kings.

7:26. But what went you out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to you, and
more than a prophet.

7:27. This is he of whom it is written: Behold I send my angel before
thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.

7:28. For I say to you: Amongst those that are born of women, there is
not a greater prophet than John the Baptist. But he that is the lesser
in the kingdom of God is greater than he.

7:29. And all the people hearing, and the publicans, justified God,
being baptized with John’s baptism.

Justified God.... that is, praised the justice of God, feared and
worshipped God, as just and merciful.

7:30. But the Pharisees and the lawyers despised the counsel of God
against themselves, being not baptized by him.

7:31. And the Lord said: Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
generation? And to what are they like?

7:32. They are like to children sitting in the marketplace and speaking
one to another and saying: We have piped to you, and you have not
danced: we have mourned, and you have not wept.

7:33. For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine.
And you say: He hath a devil.

7:34. The Son of man is come eating and drinking. And you say: Behold a
man that is a glutton and a drinker of wine, a friend of publicans and
sinners.

7:35. And wisdom is justified by all her children.

7:36. And one of the Pharisees desired him to eat with him. And he went
into the house of the Pharisee and sat down to meat.

One of the Pharisees: that is, Simon.

7:37. And behold a woman that was in the city, a sinner, when she knew
that he sat at meat in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster box
of ointment.

7:38. And standing behind at his feet, she began to wash his feet with
tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head and kissed his feet and
anointed them with the ointment.

7:39. And the Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, spoke within
himself, saying: This man, if he were if a prophet, would know surely
who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him, that she is a
sinner.

7:40. And Jesus answering, said to him: Simon, I have somewhat to say
to thee. But he said: Master, say it.

7:41. A certain creditor had two debtors: the one owed five hundred
pence and the other fifty.

7:42. And whereas they had not wherewith to pay, he forgave them both.
Which therefore of the two loveth him most?

7:43. Simon answering, said: I suppose that he to whom he forgave most.
And he said to him: Thou hast judged rightly.

7:44. And turning to the woman, he said unto Simon: Dost thou see this
woman? I entered into thy house: thou gavest me no water for my feet.
But she with tears hath washed my feet; and with her hairs hath wiped
them.

7:45. Thou gavest me no kiss. But she, since she came in, hath not
ceased to kiss my feet.

7:46. My head with oil thou didst not anoint. But she with ointment
hath anointed my feet.

7:47. Wherefore, I say to thee: Many sins are forgiven her, because she
hath loved much. But to whom less is forgiven, he loveth less.

Many sins are forgiven her, because she hath loved much.... In the
scripture an effect sometimes seems attributed to one only cause, when
there are divers other concurring dispositions; for the sins of this
woman, in this verse, are said to be forgiven, because she loved much:
but (ver. 50) Christ tells her, Thy faith hath made thee safe. Hence in
a true conversion are joined faith, hope, love, sorrow for sin, and
other pious dispositions.

7:48. And he said to her: Thy sins are forgiven thee.

7:49. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within
themselves: Who is this that forgiveth sins also?

7:50. And he said to the woman: Thy faith hath made thee safe. Go in
peace.


Luke Chapter 8

The parable of the seed. Christ stills the storm at sea, casts out the
legion, heals the issue of blood and raises the daughter of Jairus to
life.

8:1. And it came to pass afterwards, that he travelled through the
cities and towns, preaching and evangelizing the kingdom of God: and
the twelve with him:

8:2. And certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and
infirmities: Mary who is called Magdalen, out of whom seven devils were
gone forth,

8:3. And Joanna the wife of Chusa, Herod’s steward, and Susanna and
many others who ministered unto him of their substance.

8:4. And when a very great multitude was gathered together and hastened
out of the cities, unto him, he spoke by a similitude.

8:5. The sower went out to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some fell by
the way side. And it was trodden down: and the fowls of the air
devoured it.

8:6. And other some fell upon a rock. And as soon as it was sprung up,
it withered away, because it had no moisture.

8:7. And other some fell among thorns. And the thorns growing up with
it, choked it.

8:8. And other some fell upon good ground and, being sprung up, yielded
fruit a hundredfold. Saying these things, he cried out: He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear.

8:9. And his disciples asked him what this parable might be.

8:10. To whom he said: To you it is given to know the mystery of the
kingdom of God; but to the rest in parables, that seeing they may not
see and hearing may not understand.

Seeing they may not see.... See the annotation, Mark 4. 12.

8:11. Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.

8:12. And they by the way side are they that hear: then the devil
cometh and taketh the word out of their heart, lest believing they
should be saved.

8:13. Now they upon the rock are they who when they hear receive the
word with joy: and these have no roots: for they believe for a while
and in time of temptation they fall away.

8:14. And that which fell among thorns are they who have heard and,
going their way, are choked with the cares and riches and pleasures of
this life and yield no fruit.

8:15. But that on the good ground are they who in a good and perfect
heart, hearing the word, keep it and bring forth fruit in patience.

8:16. Now no man lighting a candle covereth it with a vessel or putteth
it under a bed: but setteth it upon a candlestick, that they who come
in may see the light.

8:17. For there is not any thing secret that shall not be made
manifest, nor hidden that shall not be known and come abroad.

8:18. Take heed therefore how you hear. For whosoever hath, to him
shall be given: and whosoever hath not, that also which he thinketh he
hath shall be taken away from him.

8:19. And his mother and brethren came unto him: and they could not
come at him for the crowd.

8:20. And it was told him: Thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to see thee.

8:21. Who answering, said to them: My mother and my brethren are they
who hear the word of God and do it.

8:22. And it came to pass on a certain day that he went into a little
ship with his disciples. And he said to them: Let us go over to the
other side of the lake. And they launched forth.

8:23. And when they were sailing, he slept. And there came down a storm
of wind upon the lake: and they were filled and were in danger.

8:24. And they came and awaked him, saying: Master, we perish. But he
arising, rebuked the wind and the rage of the water. And it ceased: and
there was a calm.

8:25. And he said to them: Where is your faith? Who being afraid,
wondered, saying one to another: Who is this (think you), that he
commandeth both the winds and the sea: and they obey him?

8:26. And they sailed to the country of the Gerasens, which is over
against Galilee.

8:27. And when he was come forth to the land, there met him a certain
man who had a devil now a very long time. And he wore no clothes:
neither did he abide in a house, but in the sepulchres.

8:28. And when he saw Jesus, he fell down before him. And crying out
with a loud voice, he said: What have I to do with thee, Jesus, Son of
the most high God? I beseech thee, do not torment me.

8:29. For he commanded the unclean spirit to go out of the man. For
many times it seized him: and he was bound with chains and kept in
fetters: and breaking the bonds, he was driven by the devil into the
deserts.

8:30. And Jesus asked him, saying: What is thy name? But he said:
Legion. Because many devils were entered into him.

8:31. And they besought him that he would not command them to go into
the abyss.

8:32. And there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the mountain:
and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them. And
he suffered them.

8:33. The devils therefore went out of the man and entered into the
swine. And the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake and
were stifled.

8:34. Which when they that fed them saw done, they fled away and told
it in the city and in the villages.

8:35. And they went out to see what was done. And they came to Jesus
and found the man out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at his
feet, clothed and in his right mind. And they were afraid.

8:36. And they also that had seen told them how he had been healed from
the legion.

8:37. And all the multitude of the country of the Gerasens besought him
to depart from them: for they were taken with great fear. And he, going
up into the ship, returned back again.

8:38. Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him
that he might be with him. But Jesus sent him away, saying:

8:39. Return to thy house and tell how great things God hath done to
thee. And he went through the whole city, publishing how great things
Jesus had done to him.

8:40. And it came to pass that when Jesus was returned, the multitude
received him: for they were all waiting for him.

8:41. And behold there came a man whose name was Jairus: and he was a
ruler of the synagogue. And he fell down at the feet of Jesus,
beseeching him that he would come into his house:

8:42. For he had an only daughter, almost twelve years old, and she was
dying. And it happened as he went that he was thronged by the
multitudes.

8:43. And there was a certain woman having an issue of blood twelve
years, who had bestowed all her substance on physicians and could not
be healed by any.

8:44. She came behind him and touched the hem of his garment: and
immediately the issue of her blood stopped.

8:45. And Jesus said: Who is it that touched me? And all denying, Peter
and they that were with him said: Master, the multitudes throng and
press thee; and dost thou say, who touched me?

8:46. And Jesus said: Somebody hath touched me; for I know that virtue
is gone out from me.

8:47. And the woman seeing that she was not hid, came trembling and
fell down before his feet and declared before all the people for what
cause she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed.

8:48. But he said to her: Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. Go
thy way in peace.

8:49. As he was yet speaking, there cometh one to the ruler of the
synagogue, saying to him: Thy daughter is dead: trouble him not.

8:50. And Jesus hearing this word, answered the father of the maid:
Fear not. Believe only: and she shall be safe.

8:51. And when he was come to the house, he suffered not any man to go
in with him, but Peter and James and John, and the father and mother of
the maiden.

8:52. And all wept and mourned for her. But he said: Weep not. The maid
is not dead, but sleepeth.

8:53. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

8:54. But he taking her by the hand, cried out, saying: Maid, arise.

8:55. And her spirit returned: and she arose immediately. And he bid
them give her to eat.

8:56. And her parents were astonished, whom he charged to tell no man
what was done.


Luke Chapter 9

Christ sends forth his apostles, feeds five thousand with five loaves,
is transfigured and casts out a devil.

9:1. Then calling together the twelve apostles, he gave them power and
authority over all devils and to cure diseases.

9:2. And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the
sick.

9:3. And he said to them: Take nothing for your journey, neither staff,
nor scrip, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats.

9:4. And whatsoever house you shall enter into, abide there and depart
not from thence.

9:5. And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city,
shake off even the dust of your feet, for a testimony against them.

9:6. And going out, they went about through the towns, preaching the
gospel and healing every where.

9:7. Now Herod, the tetrarch, heard of all things that were done by
him. And he was in a doubt, because it was said

9:8. By some that John was risen from the dead: but by other some, that
Elias had appeared: and by others, that one of the old prophets was
risen again.

9:9. And Herod said: John I have beheaded. But who is this of whom I
hear such things? And he sought to see him.

9:10. And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all they had
done. And taking them, he went aside into a desert place, apart, which
belongeth to Bethsaida.

9:11. Which when the people knew, they followed him: and he received
them and spoke to them of the kingdom of God and healed them who had
need of healing.

9:12. Now the day began to decline. And the twelve came and said to
him: Send away the multitude, that, going into the towns and villages
round about, they may lodge and get victuals; for we are here in a
desert place.

9:13. But he said to them: Give you them to eat. And they said: We have
no more than five loaves and two fishes; unless perhaps, we should go
and buy food for all this multitude.

9:14. Now there were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples: Make them sit down by fifties in a company.

9:15. And they did so and made them all sit down.

9:16. And taking the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to
heaven and blessed them: and he broke and distributed to his disciples,
to set before the multitude.

9:17. And they did all eat and were filled. And there were taken up of
fragments that remained to them, twelve baskets.

9:18. And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples also
were with him: and he asked them, saying: Whom do the people say that I
am?

9:19. But they answered and said: John the Baptist; but some say Elias:
and others say that one of the former prophets is risen again.

9:20. And he said to them: But whom do you say that I am? Simon Peter
answering, said: The Christ of God.

9:21. But he strictly charging them, commanded they should tell this to
no man.

9:22. Saying: The Son of man must suffer many things and be rejected by
the ancients and chief priests and scribes and be killed and the third
day rise again.

9:23. And he said to all: If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself and take up his cross daily and follow me.

9:24. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: for he that shall
lose his life for my sake shall save it.

9:25. For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world and lose
himself and cast away himself?

9:26. For he that shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him the
Son of man shall be ashamed, when he shall come in his majesty and that
of his Father and of the holy angels.

9:27. But I tell you of a truth: There are some standing here that
shall not taste death till they see the kingdom of God.

9:28. And it came to pass, about eight days after these words, that he
took Peter and James and John and went up into a mountain to pray.

9:29. And whilst he prayed, the shape of his countenance was altered
and his raiment became white and glittering.

9:30. And behold two men were talking with him. And they were Moses and
Elias,

9:31. Appearing in majesty. And they spoke of his decease that he
should accomplish in Jerusalem.

9:32. But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep. And
waking, they saw his glory and the two men that stood with him.

9:33. And it came to pass that, as they were departing from him, Peter
saith to Jesus: Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make
three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses; and one for Elias:
not knowing what he said.

9:34. And as he spoke these things, there came a cloud and overshadowed
them. And they were afraid when they entered into the cloud.

9:35. And a voice came out of the cloud; saying: This is my beloved
son. Hear him.

9:36. And whilst the voice was uttered Jesus was found alone. And they
held their peace and told no man in those days any of these things
which they had seen.

9:37. And it came to pass the day following, when they came down from
the mountain, there met him a great multitude.

9:38. And behold a man among the crowd cried out, saying: Master, I
beseech thee, look upon my son, because he is my only one.

9:39. And lo, a spirit seizeth him, and he suddenly crieth out, and he
throweth him down and teareth him, so that he foameth; and bruising
him, he hardly departeth from him.

9:40. And I desired thy disciples to cast him out: and they could not.

9:41. And Jesus, answering, said: O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you and suffer you? Bring hither thy son.

9:42. And as he was coming to him, the devil threw him down and tore
him.

9:43. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and cured the boy and
restored him to his father.

9:44. And all were astonished at the mighty power of God. But while all
wondered at all the things he did, he said to his disciples: Lay you up
in your hearts these words, for it shall come to pass that the Son of
man shall be delivered into the hands of men.

9:45. But they understood not this word: and it was hid from them, so
that they perceived it not. And they were afraid to ask him concerning
this word.

9:46. And there entered a thought into them, which of them should be
greater.

9:47. But Jesus seeing the thoughts of their hearts, took a child and
set him by him,

9:48. And said to them: Whosoever shall receive this child in my name
receiveth me; and whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent
me. For he that is the lesser among you all, he is the greater.

9:49. And John, answering, said: Master, we saw a certain man casting
out devils in thy name: and we forbade him, because he followeth not
with us.

9:50. And Jesus said to him: Forbid him not: for he that is not against
you is for you.

9:51. And it came to pass, when the days of his assumption were
accomplishing, that he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.

9:52. And he sent messengers before his face: and going, they entered
into a city of the Samaritans, to prepare for him.

9:53. And they received him not, because his face was of one going to
Jerusalem.

9:54. And when his disciples, James and John, had seen this, they said:
Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and
consume them?

9:55. And turning, he rebuked them, saying: you know not of what spirit
you are.

9:56. The Son of man came not to destroy souls, but to save. And they
went into another town.

9:57. And it came to pass, as they walked in the way, that a certain
man said to him: I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

9:58. Jesus said to him: The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
nests: but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

9:59. But he said to another: Follow me. And he said: Lord, suffer me
first to go and to bury my father.

9:60. And Jesus said to him: Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou
and preach the kingdom of God.

9:61. And another said: I will follow thee, Lord; but let me first take
my leave of them that are at my house.

9:62. Jesus said to him: No man putting his hand to the plough and
looking back is fit for the kingdom of God.


Luke Chapter 10

Christ sends forth and instructs his seventy-two disciples. The good
Samaritan.

10:1. And after these things, the Lord appointed also other
seventy-two. And he sent them two and two before his face into every
city and place whither he himself was to come.

10:2. And he said to them: The harvest indeed is great, but the
labourers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he
send labourers into his harvest.

10:3. Go: Behold I send you as lambs among wolves.

10:4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by
the way.

10:5. Into whatever house you enter, first say: Peace be to this house.

10:6. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him:
but if not, it shall return to you.

10:7. And in the same house, remain, eating and drinking such things as
they have: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Remove not from
house to house.

10:8. And into what city soever you enter, and they receive you, eat
such things as are set before you.

10:9. And heal the sick that are therein and say to them: The kingdom
of God is come nigh unto you.

10:10. But into whatsoever city you enter, and they receive you not,
going forth into the streets thereof, say:

10:11. Even the very dust of your city that cleaveth to us, we wipe off
against you. Yet know this, that the kingdom of God is at hand.

10:12. I say to you, it shall be more tolerable at that day for Sodom
than for that city.

10:13. Woe to thee, Corozain! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! For if in Tyre
and Sidon had been wrought the mighty works that have been wrought in
you, they would have done penance long ago, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes.

10:14. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the
judgment than for you.

10:15. And thou, Capharnaum, which art exalted unto heaven, thou shalt
be thrust down to hell.

10:16. He that heareth you heareth me: and he that despiseth you
despiseth me: and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

10:17. And the seventy-two returned with joy, saying: Lord, the devils
also are subject to us in thy name.

10:18. And he said to them: I saw Satan like lightning falling from
heaven.

10:19. Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and
scorpions and upon all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall hurt
you.

10:20. But yet rejoice not in this, that spirits are subject unto you:
but rejoice in this, that your names are written in heaven.

10:21. In that same hour, he rejoiced in the Holy Ghost and said: I
confess to thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast
hidden these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them to
little ones. Yea, Father, for so it hath seemed good in thy sight.

He rejoiced in the Holy Ghost.... That is, according to his humanity he
rejoiced in the Holy Ghost, and gave thanks to his eternal Father.

10:22. All things are delivered to me by my Father. And no one knoweth
who the Son is, but the Father: and who the Father is, but the Son and
to whom the Son will reveal him.

10:23. And turning to his disciples, he said: Blessed are the eyes that
see the things which you see.

10:24. For I say to you that many prophets and kings have desired to
see the things that you see and have not seen them; and to hear the
things that you hear and have not heard them.

10:25. And behold a certain lawyer stood up, tempting him and saying,
Master, what must I do to possess eternal life?

10:26. But he said to him: What is written in the law? How readest
thou?

10:27. He answering, said: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
whole heart and with thy whole soul and with all thy strength and with
all thy mind: and thy neighbour as thyself.

10:28. And he said to him: Thou hast answered right. This do: and thou
shalt live.

10:29. But he willing to justify himself, said to Jesus: And who is my
neighbour?

10:30. And Jesus answering, said: A certain man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among robbers, who also stripped him and
having wounded him went away, leaving him half dead.

10:31. And it chanced, that a certain priest went down the same way:
and seeing him, passed by.

10:32. In like manner also a Levite, when he was near the place and saw
him, passed by.

10:33. But a certain Samaritan, being on his journey, came near him:
and seeing him, was moved with compassion:

10:34. And going up to him, bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and
wine: and setting him upon his own beast, brought him to an inn and
took care of him.

10:35. And the next day he took out two pence and gave to the host and
said: Take care of him; and whatsoever thou shalt spend over and above,
I, at my return, will repay thee.

10:36. Which of these three, in thy opinion, was neighbour to him that
fell among the robbers?

10:37. But he said: He that shewed mercy to him. And Jesus said to him:
Go, and do thou in like manner.

10:38. Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a
certain town: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her
house.

10:39. And she had a sister called Mary, who, sitting also at the
Lord’s feet, heard his word.

10:40. But Martha was busy about much serving. Who stood and said:
Lord, hast thou no care that my sister hath left me alone to serve?
Speak to her therefore, that she help me.

10:41. And the Lord answering, said to her: Martha, Martha, thou art
careful and art troubled about many things:

10:42. But one thing is necessary. Mary hath chosen the best part,
which shall not be taken away from her.


Luke Chapter 11

Christ teaches his disciples to pray. He casts out a dumb devil,
confutes the Pharisees, and pronounces woes against them for their
hypocrisy.

11:1. And it came to pass that as he was in a certain place praying,
when he ceased, one of his disciples said to him: Lord, teach us to
pray, as John also taught his disciples.

11:2. And he said to them: When you pray, say: Father, hallowed be thy
name. Thy kingdom come.

11:3. Give us this day our daily bread.

11:4. And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation.

11:5. And he said to them: Which of you shall have a friend and shall
go to him at midnight and shall say to him: Friend, lend me three
loaves,

11:6. Because a friend of mine is come off his journey to me and I have
not what to set before him.

11:7. And he from within should answer and say: Trouble me not; the
door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I cannot rise and
give thee.

11:8. Yet if he shall continue knocking, I say to you, although he will
not rise and give him because he is his friend; yet, because of his
importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.

11:9. And I say to you: Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you
shall find: knock, and it shall be opened to you.

11:10. For every one that asketh receiveth: and he that seeketh
findeth: and to him that knocketh it shall be opened:

11:11. And which of you, if he ask his father bread, will he give him a
stone? Or a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?

11:12. Or if he shall ask an egg, will he reach him a scorpion?

11:13. If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more will your Father from heaven give the good
Spirit to them that ask him?

11:14. And he was casting out a devil: and the same was dumb. And when
he had cast out the devil, the dumb spoke: and the multitudes, were in
admiration at it.

11:15. But some of them said: He casteth out devils by Beelzebub, the
prince of devils.

11:16. And others tempting, asked of him a sign from heaven.

11:17. But he seeing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom
divided against itself shall be brought to desolation; and house upon
house shall fall.

11:18. And if Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his
kingdom stand? Because you say that through Beelzebub I cast out
devils.

11:19. Now if I cast out devils by Beelzebub, by whom do your children
cast them out? Therefore, they shall be your judges.

11:20. But if I by the finger of God cast out devils, doubtless the
kingdom of God is come upon you.

11:21. When a strong man armed keepeth his court, those things are in
peace which he possesseth.

11:22. But if a stronger than he come upon him and overcome him, he
will take away all his armour wherein he trusted and will distribute
his spoils.

11:23. He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth.

11:24. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
places without water, seeking rest: and not finding, he saith: I will
return into my house whence I came out.

11:25. And when he is come, he findeth it swept and garnished.

11:26. Then he goeth and taketh with him seven other spirits more
wicked than himself: and entering in they dwell there. And the last
state of that man becomes worse than the first.

11:27. And it came to pass, as he spoke these things, a certain woman
from the crowd, lifting up her voice, said to him: Blessed is the womb
that bore thee and the paps that gave thee suck.

11:28. But he said: Yea rather, blessed are they who hear the word of
God and keep it.

11:29. And the multitudes running together, he began to say: This
generation is a wicked generation. It asketh a sign: and a sign shall
not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.

11:30. For as Jonas was a sign to the Ninivites; so shall the Son of
man also be to this generation.

11:31. The queen of the south shall rise in the judgment with the men
of this generation and shall condemn them: because she came from the
ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And behold more than
Solomon here.

11:32. The men of Ninive shall rise in the judgment with this
generation and shall condemn it; Because they did penance at the
preaching of Jonas. And behold more than Jonas here.

11:33. No man lighteth a candle and putteth it in a hidden place, nor
under a bushel: but upon a candlestick, that they that come in may see
the light.

11:34. The light of thy body is thy eye. If thy eye be single, thy
whole body will be lightsome: but if it be evil, thy body also will be
darksome.

11:35. Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not
darkness.

11:36. If then thy whole body be lightsome, having no part of darkness:
the whole shall be lightsome and, as a bright lamp, shall enlighten
thee.

11:37. And as he was speaking, a certain Pharisee prayed him that he
would dine with him. And he going in, sat down to eat.

11:38. And the Pharisee began to say, thinking within himself, why he
was not washed before dinner.

11:39. And the Lord said to him: Now you, Pharisees, make clean the
outside of the cup and of the platter: but your inside is full of
rapine and iniquity.

11:40. Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make also
that which is within?

11:41. But yet that which remaineth, give alms: and behold, all things
are clean unto you.

11:42. But woe to you, Pharisees, because you tithe mint and rue and
every herb and pass over judgment and the charity of God. Now these
things you ought to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

11:43. Woe to you, Pharisees, because you love the uppermost seats in
the synagogues and salutations in the marketplace.

11:44. Woe to you, because you are as sepulchres that appear not: and
men that walk over are not aware.

11:45. And one of the lawyers answering, saith to him: Master, in
saying these things, thou reproachest us also.

11:46. But he said: Woe to you lawyers also, because you load men with
burdens which they cannot bear and you yourselves touch not the packs
with one of your fingers.

Woe to you lawyers.... He speaks of the doctors of the law of Moses,
commonly called the scribes.

11:47. Woe to you who build the monuments of the prophets: and your
fathers killed them.

Woe to you who build, etc.... Not that the building of the monuments of
the prophets was in itself blameworthy, but only the intention of these
unhappy men, who made use of this outward shew of religion and piety,
as a means to carry on their wicked designs against the prince of
prophets.

11:48. Truly you bear witness that you consent to the doings of your
fathers. For they indeed killed them: and you build their sepulchres.

11:49. For this cause also the wisdom of God said: I will send to them
prophets and apostles: and some of them they will kill and persecute.

11:50. That the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the
foundation of the world may be required of this generation,

11:51. From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, who was
slain between the altar and the temple. Yea I say to you: It shall be
required of this generation.

11:52. Woe to you lawyers, for you have taken away the key of
knowledge. You yourselves have not entered in: and those that were
entering in, you have hindered.

11:53. And as he was saying these things to them, the Pharisees and the
lawyers began violently to urge him and to oppress his mouth about many
things,

11:54. Lying in wait for him and seeking to catch something from his
mouth, that they might accuse him.


Luke Chapter 12

Christ warns us against hypocrisy, the fear of the world and
covetousness. He admonishes all to watch.

12:1. And when great multitudes stood about him, so that they trod one
upon another, he began to say to his disciples: Beware ye of the leaven
of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

12:2. For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed: nor
hidden that shall not be known.

12:3. For whatsoever things you have spoken in darkness shall be
published in the light: and that which you have spoken in the ear in
the chambers shall be preached on the housetops.

12:4. And I say to you, my friends: Be not afraid of them who kill the
body and after that have no more that they can do.

12:5. But I will shew you whom you shall fear: Fear ye him who, after
he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell. Yea, I say to you: Fear
him.

12:6. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them
is forgotten before God?

12:7. Yea, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not
therefore: you are of more value than many sparrows.

12:8. And I say to you: Whosoever shall confess me before men, him
shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God.

12:9. But he that shall deny me before men shall be denied before the
angels of God.

12:10. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall
be forgiven him: but to him that shall blaspheme against the Holy
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.

12:11. And when they shall bring you into the synagogues and to
magistrates and powers, be not solicitous how or what you shall answer,
or what you shall say.

12:12. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what you
must say.

12:13. And one of the multitude said to him: Master, speak to my
brother that he divide the inheritance with me.

12:14. But he said to him: Man, who hath appointed me judge or divider
over you?

12:15. And he said to them: Take heed and beware of all covetousness:
for a man’s life doth not consist in the abundance of things which he
possesseth.

12:16. And he spoke a similitude to them, saying: The land of a certain
rich man brought forth plenty of fruits.

12:17. And he thought within himself, saying: What shall I do, because
I have no room where to bestow my fruits?

12:18. And he said: This will I do: I will pull down my barns and will
build greater: and into them will I gather all things that are grown to
me and my goods.

12:19. And I will say to my soul: Soul, thou hast much goods laid up
for many years. Take thy rest: eat, drink, make good cheer.

12:20. But God said to him: Thou fool, this night do they require thy
soul of thee. And whose shall those things be which thou hast provided?

12:21. So is he that layeth up treasure for himself and is not rich
towards God.

12:22. And he said to his disciples: Therefore I say to you: Be not
solicitous for your life, what you shall eat, nor for your body, what
you shall put on.

12:23. The life is more than the meat: and the body is more than the
raiment.

12:24. Consider the ravens, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
neither have they storehouse nor barn, and God feedeth them. How much
are you more valuable than they?

12:25. And which of you by taking thought can add to his stature one
cubit?

12:26. If then ye be not able to do so much as the least thing, why are
you solicitous for the rest?

12:27. Consider the lilies, how they grow: they labour not, neither do
they spin. But I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was
clothed like one of these.

12:28. Now, if God clothe in this manner the grass that is to-day in
the field and to-morrow is cast into the oven: how much more you, O ye
of little faith?

12:29. And seek not what you shall eat or what you shall drink: and be
not lifted up on high.

12:30. For all these things do the nations of the world seek. But your
Father knoweth that you have need of these things.

12:31. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his justice: and all
these things shall be added unto you.

12:32. Fear not, little flock, for it hath pleased your Father to give
you a kingdom.

12:33. Sell what you possess and give alms. Make to yourselves bags
which grow not old, a treasure in heaven which faileth not: where no
thief approacheth, nor moth corrupteth.

12:34. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

12:35. Let your loins be girt and lamps burning in your hands.

12:36. And you yourselves like to men who wait for their lord, when he
shall return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they
may open to him immediately.

12:37. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord, when he cometh, shall
find watching. Amen I say to you that he will gird himself and make
them sit down to meat and passing will minister unto them.

12:38. And if he shall come in the second watch or come in the third
watch and find them so, blessed are those servants.

12:39. But this know ye, that if the householder did know at what hour
the thief would come, he would surely watch and would not suffer his
house to be broken open.

12:40. Be you then also ready: for at what hour you think not the Son
of man will come.

12:41. And Peter said to him: Lord, dost thou speak this parable to us,
or likewise to all?

12:42. And the Lord said: Who thinkest thou is the faithful and wise
steward, whom his lord setteth over his family, to give them their
measure of wheat in due season?

12:43. Blessed is that servant whom, when his lord shall come, he shall
find so doing.

12:44. Verily I say to you, he will set him over all that he
possesseth.

12:45. But if that servant shall say in his heart: My lord is long a
coming; and shall begin to strike the men-servants and maid-servants,
and to eat and to drink and be drunk:

12:46. The lord of that servant will come in the day that he hopeth
not, and at the hour that he knoweth not: and shall separate him and
shall appoint him his portion with unbelievers.

12:47. And that servant, who knew the will of his lord and prepared not
himself and did not according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes.

12:48. But he that knew not and did things worthy of stripes shall be
beaten with few stripes. And unto whomsoever much is given, of him much
shall be required: and to whom they have committed much, of him they
will demand the more.

12:49. I am come to cast fire on the earth. And what will I, but that
it be kindled?

12:50. And I have a baptism wherewith I am to be baptized. And how am I
straitened until it be accomplished?

12:51. Think ye, that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, no;
but separation.

12:52. For there shall be from henceforth five in one house divided:
three against two, and two against three.

12:53. The father shall be divided against the son and the son against
his father: the mother against the daughter and the daughter against
her mother: the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.

12:54. And he said also to the multitudes: When you see a cloud rising
from the west, presently you say: A shower is coming. And so it
happeneth.

12:55. And when ye see the south wind blow, you say: There will be
heat. And it cometh to pass.

12:56. You hypocrites, you know how to discern the face of the heaven
and of the earth: but how is it that you do not discern this time?

12:57. And why, even of yourselves, do you not judge that which is
just?

12:58. And when thou goest with thy adversary to the prince, whilst
thou art in the way, endeavour to be delivered from him: lest perhaps
he draw thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the exacter,
and the exacter cast thee into prison.

12:59. I say to thee, thou shalt not go out thence until thou pay the
very last mite.


Luke Chapter 13

The necessity of penance. The barren fig tree. The cure of the infirm
woman. The journey to Jerusalem.

13:1. And there were present, at that very time, some that told him of
the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.

13:2. And he answering, said to them: Think you that these Galileans
were sinners above all the men of Galilee, because they suffered such
things?

13:3. No, I say to you: but unless you shall do penance, you shall all
likewise perish.

13:4. Or those eighteen upon whom the tower fell in Siloe and slew
them: think you that they also were debtors above all the men that
dwelt in Jerusalem?

13:5. No, I say to you: but except you do penance, you shall all
likewise perish.

13:6. He spoke also this parable: A certain man had a fig tree planted
in his vineyard: and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.

13:7. And he said to the dresser of the vineyard: Behold, for these
three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree and I find none. Cut
it down therefore. Why cumbereth it the ground?

13:8. But he answering, said to him: Lord, let it alone this year also,
until I dig about it and dung it.

13:9. And if happily it bear fruit: but if not, then after that thou
shalt cut it down.

13:10. And he was teaching in their synagogue on their sabbath.

13:11. And behold there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years. And she was bowed together: neither could she look
upwards at all.

13:12. Whom when Jesus saw, he called her unto him and said to her:
Woman, thou art delivered from thy infirmity.

13:13. And he laid his hands upon her: and immediately she was made
straight and glorified God.

13:14. And the ruler of the synagogue being angry that Jesus had healed
on the sabbath answering, said to the multitude: Six days there are
wherein you ought to work. In them therefore come and be healed: and
not on the sabbath day.

13:15. And the Lord answering him, said: Ye hypocrites, doth not every
one of you, on the sabbath day, loose his ox or his ass from the manger
and lead them to water?

13:16. And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound,
lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?

13:17. And when he said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed:
and all the people rejoiced for all the things that were gloriously
done by him.

13:18. He said therefore: To what is the kingdom of God like, and
whereunto shall I resemble it?

13:19. It is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and cast
into his garden: and it grew and became a great tree, and the birds of
the air lodged in the branches thereof.

13:20. And again he said: Whereunto shall I esteem the kingdom of God
to be like?

13:21. It is like to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

13:22. And he went through the cities and towns teaching and making his
journey to Jerusalem.

13:23. And a certain man said to him: Lord, are they few that are
saved? But he said to them:

13:24. Strive to enter by the narrow gate: for many, I say to you,
shall seek to enter and shall not be able.

Shall seek, etc.... Shall desire to be saved; but for want of taking
sufficient pains, and being thoroughly in earnest, shall not attain to
it.

13:25. But when the master of the house shall be gone in and shall shut
the door, you shall begin to stand without; and knock at the door,
saying: Lord, open to us. And he answering, shall say to you: I know
you not, whence you are.

13:26. Then you shall begin to say: We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence: and thou hast taught in our streets.

13:27. And he shall say to you: I know you not, whence you are. Depart
from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

13:28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; when you shall see
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, in the kingdom of
God: and you yourselves thrust out.

13:29. And there shall come from the east and the west and the north
and the south: and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.

13:30. And behold, they are last that shall be first: and they are
first that shall be last.

13:31. The same day, there came some of the Pharisees, saying to him:
Depart, and get thee hence, for Herod hath a mind to kill thee.

13:32. And he said to them: Go and tell that fox: Behold, I cast out
devils and do cures, to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I am
consummated.

13:33. Nevertheless, I must walk to-day and to-morrow and the day
following, because it cannot be that a prophet perish, out of
Jerusalem.

13:34. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets; and stonest
them that are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children as the bird doth her brood under her wings, and thou wouldest
not?

13:35. Behold your house shall be left to you desolate. And I say to
you that you shall not see me till the time come when you shall say:
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.


Luke Chapter 14

Christ heals the dropsical man. The parable of the supper. The
necessity of renouncing all to follow Christ.

14:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus went into the house of one of the
chief of the Pharisees, on the sabbath day, to eat bread, that they
watched him.

14:2. And behold, there was a certain man before him that had the
dropsy.

14:3. And Jesus answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying:
Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?

14:4. But they held their peace. But he taking him, healed him and sent
him away.

14:5. And answering them, he said: Which of you shall have an ass or an
ox fall into a pit and will not immediately draw him out, on the
sabbath day?

14:6. And they could not answer him to these things.

14:7. And he spoke a parable also to them that were invited, marking
how they chose the first seats at the table, saying to them:

14:8. When thou art invited to a wedding, sit not down in the first
place, lest perhaps one more honourable than thou be invited by him:

14:9. And he that invited thee and him, come and say to thee: Give this
man place. And then thou begin with shame to take the lowest place.

14:10. But when thou art invited, go, sit down in the lowest place;
that when he who invited thee cometh, he may say to thee: Friend, go up
higher. Then shalt thou have glory before them that sit at table with
thee.

14:11. Because every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled: and he
that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

14:12. And he said to him also that had invited him: When thou makest a
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends nor thy brethren nor thy
kinsmen nor thy neighbours who are rich; lest perhaps they also invite
thee again, and a recompense be made to thee.

14:13. But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame and the blind.

14:14. And thou shalt be blessed, because they have not wherewith to
make thee recompense: for recompense shall be made thee at the
resurrection of the just.

14:15. When one of them that sat at table with him had heard these
things, he said to him: Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of God.

14:16. But he said to him: A certain man made a great supper and
invited many.

14:17. And he sent his servant at the hour of supper to say to them
that were invited, that they should come: for now all things are ready.

14:18. And they began all at once to make excuse. The first said to
him: I have bought a farm and I must needs go out and see it. I pray
thee, hold me excused.

14:19. And another said: I have bought five yoke of oxen and I go to
try them. I pray thee, hold me excused.

14:20. And another said: I have married a wife; and therefore I cannot
come.

14:21. And the servant returning, told these things to his lord. Then
the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant: Go out
quickly into the streets and lanes of the city; and bring in hither the
poor and the feeble and the blind and the lame.

14:22. And the servant said: Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded;
and yet there is room.

14:23. And the Lord said to the servant: Go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.

14:24. But I say unto you that none of those men that were invited
shall taste of my supper.

14:25. And there went great multitudes with him. And turning, he said
to them:

14:26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother and
wife and children and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also,
he cannot be my disciple.

Hate not, etc.... The law of Christ does not allow us to hate even our
enemies, much less our parents: but the meaning of the text is, that we
must be in that disposition of soul, as to be willing to renounce, and
part with every thing, how near or dear soever it may be to us, that
would keep us from following Christ.

14:27. And whosoever doth not carry his cross and come after me cannot
be my disciple.

14:28. For which of you, having a mind to build a tower, doth not first
sit down and reckon the charges that are necessary, whether he have
wherewithal to finish it:

14:29. Lest, after he hath laid the foundation and is not able to
finish it, all that see it begin to mock him,

14:30. Saying: This man began to build and was not able to finish.

14:31. Or, what king, about to go to make war against another king,
doth not first sit down and think whether he be able, with ten
thousand, to meet him that, with twenty thousand, cometh against him?

14:32. Or else, while the other is yet afar off, sending an embassy, he
desireth conditions of peace.

14:33. So likewise every one of you that doth not renounce all that he
possesseth cannot be my disciple.

14:34. Salt is good. But if the salt shall lose its savour, wherewith
shall it be seasoned?

14:35. It is neither profitable for the land nor for the dunghill: but
shall be cast out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.


Luke Chapter 15

The parables of the lost sheep and of the prodigal son.

15:1. Now the publicans and sinners drew near unto him to hear him.

15:2. And the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying: This man
receiveth sinners and eateth with them.

15:3. And he spoke to them this parable, saying:

15:4. What man of you that hath an hundred sheep, and if he shall lose
one of them, doth he not leave the ninety-nine in the desert and go
after that which was lost, until he find it?

15:5. And when he hath found it, lay it upon his shoulders, rejoicing?

15:6. And coming home, call together his friends and neighbours, saying
to them: Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost?

15:7. I say to you that even so there shall be joy in heaven upon one
sinner that doth penance, more than upon ninety-nine just who need not
penance.

15:8. Or what woman having ten groats, if she lose one groat, doth not
light a candle and sweep the house and seek diligently until she find
it?

15:9. And when she hath found it, call together her friends and
neighbours, saying: Rejoice with me, because I have found the groat
which I had lost.

15:10. So I say to you, there shall be joy before the angels of God
upon one sinner doing penance.

Before the angels.... By this it is plain that the spirits in heaven
have a concern for us below, and a joy at our repentance and
consequently a knowledge of it.

15:11. And he said: A certain man had two sons.

15:12. And the younger of them said to his father: Father, give me the
portion of substance that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his
substance.

15:13. And not many days after, the younger son, gathering all
together, went abroad into a far country: and there wasted his
substance, living riotously.

15:14. And after he had spent all, there came a mighty famine in that
country: and he began to be in want.

15:15. And he went and cleaved to one of the citizens of that country.
And he sent him into his farm to feed swine.

15:16. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks the swine
did eat: and no man gave unto him.

15:17. And returning to himself, he said: How many hired servants in my
father’s house abound with bread, and I here perish with hunger!

15:18. I will arise and will go to my father and say to him: Father, I
have sinned against heaven and before thee.

15:19. I am not worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
hired servants.

15:20. And rising up, he came to his father. And when he was yet a
great way off, his father saw him and was moved with compassion and
running to him fell upon his neck and kissed him.

15:21. And the son said to him: Father: I have sinned against heaven
and before thee I am not now worthy to be called thy son.

15:22. And the father said to his servants: Bring forth quickly the
first robe and put it on him: and put a ring on his hand and shoes on
his feet.

15:23. And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it: and let us eat
and make merry:

15:24. Because this my son was dead and is come to life again, was lost
and is found. And they began to be merry.

15:25. Now his elder son was in the field and when he came and drew
nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing.

15:26. And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things
meant.

15:27. And he said to him: Thy brother is come and thy father hath
killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe.

15:28. And he was angry and would not go in. His father therefore
coming out began to entreat him.

15:29. And he answering, said to his father: Behold, for so many years
do I serve thee and I have never transgressed thy commandment: and yet
thou hast never given me a kid to make merry with my friends.

15:30. But as soon as this thy son is come, who hath devoured his
substance with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.

15:31. But he said to him: Son, thou art always with me; and all I have
is thine.

15:32. But it was fit that we should make merry and be glad: for this
thy brother was dead and is come to life again; he was lost, and is
found.


Luke Chapter 16

The parable of the unjust steward and of the rich man and Lazarus.

16:1. And he said also to his disciples: There was a certain rich man
who had a steward: and the same was accused unto him, that he had
wasted his goods.

16:2. And he called him and said to him: How is it that I hear this of
thee? Give an account of thy stewardship: for now thou canst be steward
no longer.

16:3. And the steward said within himself: What shall I do, because my
lord taketh away from me the stewardship? To dig I am not able; to beg
I am ashamed.

16:4. I know what I will do, that when I shall be removed from the
stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.

16:5. Therefore, calling together every one of his lord’s debtors, he
said to the first: How much dost thou owe my lord?

16:6. But he said: An hundred barrels of oil. And he said to him: Take
thy bill and sit down quickly and write fifty.

16:7. Then he said to another: And how much dost thou owe? Who said: An
hundred quarters of wheat. He said to him: Take thy bill and write
eighty.

16:8. And the lord commended the unjust steward, forasmuch as he had
done wisely: for the children of this world are wiser in their
generation than the children of light.

16:9. And I say to you: Make unto you friends of the mammon of
iniquity: that when you shall fail, they may receive you into
everlasting dwellings.

Mammon of iniquity.... Mammon signifies riches. They are here called
the mammon of iniquity, because oftentimes ill gotten, ill bestowed, or
an occasion of evil; and at the best are but worldly, and false; and
not the true riches of a Christian. They may receive.... By this we
see, that the poor servants of God, whom we have relieved by our alms,
may hereafter, by their intercession, bring our souls to heaven.

16:10. He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in
that which is greater: and he that is unjust in that which is little is
unjust also in that which is greater.

16:11. If then you have not been faithful in the unjust mammon, who
will trust you with that which is the true?

16:12. And if you have not been faithful in that which is another’s,
who will give you that which is your own?

16:13. No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the
one and love the other: or he will hold to the one and despise the
other. You cannot serve God and mammon.

16:14. Now the Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things:
and they derided him.

16:15. And he said to them: you are they who justify yourselves before
men, but God knoweth your hearts. For that which is high to men is an
abomination before God.

16:16. The law and the prophets were until John. From that time the
kingdom of God is preached: and every one useth violence towards it.

16:17. And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass than one tittle of
the law to fall.

16:18. Every one that putteth away his wife and marrieth another
committeth adultery: and he that marrieth her that is put away from her
husband committeth adultery.

16:19. There was a certain rich man who was clothed in purple and fine
linen and feasted sumptuously every day.

16:20. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, who lay at his
gate, full of sores,

16:21. Desiring to be filled with the crumbs that fell from the rich
man’s table. And no one did give him: moreover the dogs came and licked
his sores.

16:22. And it came to pass that the beggar died and was carried by the
angels into Abraham’s bosom. And the rich man also died: and he was
buried in hell.

Abraham’s bosom.... The place of rest, where the souls of the saints
resided, till Christ had opened heaven by his death.

16:23. And lifting up his eyes when he was in torments, he saw Abraham
afar off and Lazarus in his bosom:

16:24. And he cried and said: Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my
tongue: for I am tormented in this flame.

16:25. And Abraham said to him: Son, remember that thou didst receive
good things in thy lifetime, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now
he is comforted and thou art tormented.

16:26. And besides all this, between us and you, there is fixed a great
chaos: so that they who would pass from hence to you cannot, nor from
thence come hither.

16:27. And he said: Then, father, I beseech thee that thou wouldst send
him to my father’s house, for I have five brethren,

16:28. That he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this
place of torments.

16:29. And Abraham said to him: They have Moses and the prophets. Let
them hear them.

16:30. But he said: No, father Abraham: but if one went to them from
the dead, they will do penance.

16:31. And he said to him: If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they believe, if one rise again from the dead.


Luke Chapter 17

Lessons of avoiding scandal and of the efficacy of faith. The ten
lepers. The manner of the coming of Christ.

17:1. And he said to his disciples: It is impossible that scandals
should not come. But woe to him through whom they come!

17:2. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck and he cast into the sea, than that he should scandalize one of
these little ones.

17:3. Take heed to yourselves. If thy brother sin against thee, reprove
him: and if he do penance, forgive him.

17:4. And if he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times
in a day be converted unto thee, saying: I repent: forgive him.

17:5. And the apostles said to the Lord: Increase our faith.

17:6. And the Lord said: If you had faith like to a grain of mustard
seed, you might say to this mulberry tree: Be thou rooted up and be
thou transplanted into the sea. And it would obey you.

17:7. But which of you, having a servant ploughing or feeding cattle,
will say to him, when he is come from the field: Immediately go. Sit
down to meat.

17:8. And will not rather say to him: Make ready my supper and gird
thyself and serve me, whilst I eat and drink; and afterwards thou shalt
eat and drink?

17:9. Doth he thank that servant for doing the things which he
commanded him?

17:10. I think not. So you also, when you shall have done all these
things that are commanded you, say: We are unprofitable servants; we
have done that which we ought to do.

Unprofitable servants.... Because our service is of no profit to our
master; and he justly claims it as our bounden duty. But though we are
unprofitable to him, our serving him is not unprofitable to us; for he
is pleased to give by his grace a value to our good works, which, in
consequence of his promise, entitles them to an eternal reward.

17:11. And it came to pass, as he was going to Jerusalem, he passed
through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.

17:12. And as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten men
that were lepers, who stood afar off.

17:13. And lifted up their voice, saying: Jesus, Master, have mercy on
us.

17:14. Whom when he saw, he said: Go, shew yourselves to the priests.
And it came to pass, as they went, they were made clean.

17:15. And one of them, when he saw that he was made clean, went back,
with a loud voice glorifying God.

17:16. And he fell on his face before his feet, giving thanks. And this
was a Samaritan.

17:17. And Jesus answering, said: Were not ten made clean? And where
are the nine?

17:18. There is no one found to return and give glory to God, but this
stranger.

17:19. And he said to him: Arise, go thy way; for thy faith hath made
thee whole.

17:20. And being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God should
come, he answered them and said: The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation.

17:21. Neither shall they say: Behold here, or behold there. For lo,
the kingdom of God is within you.

17:22. And he said to his disciples: The days will come when you shall
desire to see one day of the Son of man. And you shall not see it.

17:23. And they will say to you: See here, and see there. Go ye not
after, nor follow them.

17:24. For as the lightning that lighteneth from under heaven shineth
unto the parts that are under heaven, so shall the Son of man be in his
day.

17:25. But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this
generation.

17:26. And as it came to pass in the days of Noe, so shall it be also
in the days of the Son of man.

17:27. They did eat and drink, they married wives and were given in
marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark and the flood
came and destroyed them all.

17:28. Likewise as it came to pass in the days of Lot. They did eat and
drink, they bought and sold, they planted and built.

17:29. And in the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all.

17:30. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man shall be
revealed.

17:31. In that hour, he that shall be on the housetop, and his goods in
the house, let him not go down to take them away: and he that shall be
in the field, in like manner, let him not return back.

17:32. Remember Lot’s wife.

17:33. Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it: and
whosoever shall lose it shall preserve it.

17:34. I say to you: In that night there shall be two men in one bed.
The one shall be taken and the other shall be left.

17:35. Two women shall be grinding together. The one shall be taken and
the other shall be left. Two men shall be in the field. The one shall
be taken and the other shall be left.

17:36. They answering, say to him: Where, Lord?

17:37. Who said to them: Wheresoever the body shall be, thither will
the eagles also be gathered together.


Luke Chapter 18

We must pray always. The Pharisee and the publican. The danger of
riches. The blind man is restored to sight.

18:1. And he spoke also a parable to them, that we ought always to pray
and not to faint,

18:2. Saying: There was a judge in a certain city, who feared not God
nor regarded man.

18:3. And there was a certain widow in that city; and she came to him,
saying: Avenge me of my adversary.

Avenge.... That is, do me justice. It is a Hebraism.

18:4. And he would not for a long time. But afterwards he said within
himself: Although I fear not God nor regard man,

18:5. Yet because this widow is troublesome to me, I will avenge her,
lest continually coming she weary me.

18:6. And the Lord said: Hear what the unjust judge saith.

18:7. And will not God revenge his elect who cry to him day and night?
And will he have patience in their regard?

18:8. I say to you that he will quickly revenge them. But yet the Son
of man, when he cometh, shall he find, think you, faith on earth?

18:9. And to some who trusted in themselves as just and despised
others, he spoke also this parable:

18:10. Two men went up into the temple to pray: the one a Pharisee and
the other a publican.

18:11. The Pharisee standing, prayed thus with himself: O God, I give
thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, as also is this publican.

18:12. I fast twice in a week: I give tithes of all that I possess.

18:13. And the publican, standing afar off, would not so much as lift
up his eyes towards heaven; but struck his breast, saying: O God, be
merciful to me a sinner.

18:14. I say to you, this man went down into his house justified rather
than the other: because every one that exalteth himself shall be
humbled: and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

18:15. And they brought unto him also infants, that he might touch
them. Which when the disciples saw, they rebuked them.

18:16. But Jesus, calling them together, said: Suffer children to come
to me and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.

18:17. Amen, I say to you: Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
God as a child shall not enter into it.

18:18. And a certain ruler asked him, saying: Good master, what shall I
do to possess everlasting life?

18:19. And Jesus said to him: Why dost thou call me good? None is good
but God alone.

18:20. Thou knowest the commandments: Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt
not commit adultery: Thou shalt not steal: Thou shalt not bear false
witness: Honour thy father and mother.

18:21. Who said: All these things have I kept from my youth.

18:22. Which when Jesus had heard, he said to him: Yet one thing is
wanting to thee. Sell all whatever thou hast and give to the poor: and
thou shalt have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.

18:23. He having heard these things, became sorrowful: for he was very
rich.

18:24. And Jesus seeing him become sorrowful, said: How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!

18:25. For it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

18:26. And they that heard it said: Who then can be saved?

18:27. He said to them: The things that are impossible with men are
possible with God.

18:28. Then Peter said: Behold, we have left all things and have
followed thee.

18:29. Who said to them: Amen, I say to you, there is no man that hath
left home or parents or brethren or wife or children, for the kingdom
of God’s sake,

18:30. Who shall not receive much more in this present time, and in the
world to come life everlasting.

18:31. Then Jesus took unto him the twelve and said to them: Behold, we
go up to Jerusalem; and all things shall be accomplished which were
written by the prophets concerning the Son of man.

18:32. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles and shall be mocked
and scourged and spit upon.

18:33. And after they have scourged him, they will put him to death.
And the third day he shall rise again.

18:34. And they understood none of these things, and this word was hid
from them: and they understood not the things that were said.

18:35. Now it came to pass, when he drew nigh to Jericho, that a
certain blind man sat by the way side, begging.

18:36. And when he heard the multitude passing by, he asked what this
meant.

18:37. And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.

18:38. And he cried out, saying: Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.

18:39. And they that went before rebuked him, that he should hold his
peace: but he cried out much more: Son of David, have mercy on me.

18:40. And Jesus standing, commanded him to be brought unto him. And
when he was come near, he asked him,

18:41. Saying; What wilt thou that I do to thee? But he said: Lord,
that I may see.

18:42. And Jesus said to him: Receive thy sight: thy faith hath made
thee whole.

18:43. And immediately he saw and followed him, glorifying God. And all
the people, when they saw it, gave praise to God.


Luke Chapter 19

Zacheus entertains Christ. The parable of the pounds. Christ rides upon
an ass and weeps over Jerusalem.

19:1. And entering he walked through Jericho.

19:2. And behold, there was a man named Zacheus, who was the chief of
the publicans: and he was rich.

19:3. And he sought to see Jesus who he was: and he could not for the
crowd, because he was low of stature.

19:4. And running before, he climbed up into a sycamore tree, that he
might see him: for he was to pass that way.

19:5. And when Jesus was come to the place, looking up, he saw him and
said to him: Zacheus, make haste and come down: for this day I must
abide in thy house.

19:6. And he made haste and came down and received him with joy.

19:7. And when all saw it, they murmured, saying, that he was gone to
be a guest with a man that was a sinner.

19:8. But Zacheus standing, said to the Lord: Behold, Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wronged any man of any
thing, I restore him fourfold.

19:9. Jesus said to him: This day is salvation come to this house,
because he also is a son of Abraham.

19:10. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost.

19:11. As they were hearing these things, he added and spoke a parable,
because he was nigh to Jerusalem and because they thought that the
kingdom of God should immediately be manifested.

19:12. He said therefore: a certain nobleman went into a far country,
to receive for himself a kingdom and to return.

19:13. And calling his ten servants, he gave them ten pounds and said
to them: Trade till I come.

He gave them ten pounds.... In the original, what is here translated a
pound, is in Latin, mina, in value of our coin, three pounds two
shillings and sixpence.

19:14. But his citizens hated him and they sent an embassage after him,
saying: We will not have this man to reign over us.

19:15. And it came to pass that he returned, having received the
kingdom: and he commanded his servants to be called, to whom he had
given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by
trading,

19:16. And the first came saying: Lord, thy pound hath gained ten
pounds.

19:17. And he said to him: Well done, thou good servant, because thou
hast been faithful in a little, thou shalt have power over ten cities.

19:18. And the second came, saying: Lord, thy pound hath gained five
pounds.

19:19. And he said to him: Be thou also over five cities.

19:20. And another came, saying: Lord, behold here is thy pound, which
I have kept laid up in a napkin.

19:21. For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou takest
up what thou didst not lay down: and thou reapest that which thou didst
not sow.

19:22. He saith to him: Out of thy own mouth I judge thee, thou wicked
servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up what I laid
not down and reaping that which I did not sow.

19:23. And why then didst thou not give my money into the bank, that at
my coming I might have exacted it with usury?

19:24. And he said to them that stood by: Take the pound away from him
and give it to him that hath ten pounds.

19:25. And they said to him: Lord, he hath ten pounds.

19:26. But I say to you that to every one that hath shall be given, and
he shall abound: and from him that hath not, even that which he hath
shall be taken from him.

19:27. But as for those my enemies, who would not have me reign over
them, bring them hither and kill them before me.

19:28. And having said these things, he went before, going up to
Jerusalem.

19:29. And it came to pass, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and
Bethania, unto the mount called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples,

19:30. Saying: Go into the town which is over against you, at your
entering into which you shall find the colt of an ass tied, on which no
man ever hath sitten: loose him and bring him hither.

19:31. And if any man shall ask you: Why do you loose him? You shall
say thus unto him: Because the Lord hath need of his service.

19:32. And they that were sent went their way and found the colt
standing, as he had said unto them.

19:33. And as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said to
them: Why loose you the colt?

19:34. But they said: Because the Lord hath need of him.

19:35. And they brought him to Jesus. And casting their garments on the
colt, they set Jesus thereon.

19:36. And as he went, they spread their clothes underneath in the way.

19:37. And when he was now coming near the descent of Mount Olivet, the
whole multitude of his disciples began with joy to praise God with a
loud voice, for all the mighty works they had seen,

19:38. Saying: Blessed be the king who cometh in the name of the Lord!
Peace in heaven and glory on high!

19:39. And some of the Pharisees, from amongst the multitude, said to
him: Master, rebuke thy disciples.

19:40. To whom he said: I say to you that if these shall hold their
peace, the stones will cry out.

19:41. And when he drew near, seeing the city, he wept over it, saying:

19:42. If thou also hadst known, and that in this thy day, the things
that are to thy peace: but now they are hidden from thy eyes.

19:43. For the days shall come upon thee: and thy enemies shall cast a
trench about thee and compass thee round and straiten thee on every
side,

19:44. And beat thee flat to the ground, and thy children who are in
thee. And they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone: because
thou hast not known the time of thy visitation.

19:45. And entering into the temple, he began to cast out them that
sold therein and them that bought.

19:46. Saying to them: It is written: My house is the house of prayer.
But you have made it a den of thieves.

19:47. And he was teaching daily in the temple. And the chief priests
and the scribes and the rulers of the people sought to destroy him.

19:48. And they found not what to do to him: for all the people were
very attentive to hear him.


Luke Chapter 20

The parable of the husbandmen. Of paying tribute to Caesar and of the
resurrection of the dead.

20:1. And it came to pass that on one of the days, as he was teaching
the people in the temple and preaching the gospel, the chief priests
and the scribes, with the ancients, met together,

20:2. And spoke to him, saying: Tell us, by what authority dost thou
these things? Or, who is he that hath given thee this authority?

20:3. And Jesus answering, said to them: I will also ask you one thing.
Answer me:

20:4. The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?

20:5. But they thought within themselves, saying: If we shall say, From
heaven: he will say: Why then did you not believe in him?

20:6. But if we say, of men: the whole people will stone us. For they
are persuaded that John was a prophet.

20:7. And they answered that they knew not whence it was.

20:8. And Jesus said to them: Neither do I tell you by what authority I
do these things.

20:9. And he began to speak to the people this parable: A certain man
planted a vineyard and let it out to husbandmen: and he was abroad for
a long time.

20:10. And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they
should give him of the fruit of the vineyard. Who, beating him, sent
him away empty.

20:11. And again he sent another servant. But they beat him also and,
treating him reproachfully, sent him away empty.

20:12. And again he sent the third: and they wounded him also and cast
him out.

20:13. Then the lord of the vineyard said: What shall I do? I will send
my beloved son. It may be, when they see him, they will reverence him.

20:14. Whom, when the husbandmen saw, they thought within themselves,
saying: This is the heir. Let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours.

20:15. So casting him out of the vineyard, they killed him. What
therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them?

20:16. He will come and will destroy these husbandmen and will give the
vineyard to others. Which they hearing, said to him: God forbid.

20:17. But he looking on them, said: What is this then that is written,
The stone, which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of
the corner?

20:18. Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be bruised: and upon
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

20:19. And the chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on him
the same hour: but they feared the people, for they knew that he spoke
this parable to them.

20:20. And being upon the watch, they sent spies, who should feign
themselves just, that they might take hold of him in his words, that
they might deliver him up to the authority and power of the governor.

20:21. And they asked him, saying: Master, we know that thou speakest
and teachest rightly: and thou dost not respect any person, but
teachest the way of God in truth.

20:22. Is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar, or no?

20:23. But he, considering their guile, said to them: Why tempt you me?

20:24. Shew me a penny. Whose image and inscription hath it? They
answering, said to him: Caesar’s.

20:25. And he said to them: Render therefore to Caesar the things, that
are Caesar’s: and to God the things that are God’s.

20:26. And they could not reprehend his word before the people: and
wondering at his answer, they held their peace.

20:27. And there came to him some of the Sadducees, who deny that there
is any resurrection: and they asked him,

20:28. Saying: Master, Moses wrote unto us: If any man’s brother die,
having a wife, and he leave no children, that his brother should take
her to wife and raise up seed unto his brother.

20:29. There were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a wife
and died without children.

20:30. And the next took her to wife: and he also died childless.

20:31. And the third took her. And in like manner, all the seven: and
they left no children and died.

20:32. Last of all the woman died also.

20:33. In the resurrection therefore, whose wife of them shall she be?
For all the seven had her to wife.

20:34. And Jesus said to them: The children of this world marry and are
given in marriage:

20:35. But they that shall be accounted worthy of that world and of the
resurrection from the dead shall neither be married nor take wives.

20:36. Neither can they die any more for they are equal to the angels
and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.

20:37. Now that the dead rise again, Moses also shewed at the bush,
when he called the Lord: The God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and
the God of Jacob.

20:38. For he is not the God of the dead, but of the living: for all
live to him.

20:39. And some of the scribes answering, said to him: Master, thou
hast said well.

20:40. And after that they durst not ask him any more questions.

20:41. But he said to them: How say they that Christ is the son of
David?

20:42. And David himself saith in the book of Psalms: The Lord said to
my Lord, sit thou on my right hand,

20:43. Till I make thy enemies thy footstool.

20:44. David then calleth him Lord. And how is he his son?

20:45. And in the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples:

20:46. Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in long robes and love
salutations in the market place and the first chairs in the synagogues
and the chief rooms at feasts:

20:47. Who devour the houses of widows, feigning long prayer. These
shall receive greater damnation.


Luke Chapter 21

The widow’s mites. The signs that should forerun the destruction of
Jerusalem and the end of the world.

21:1. And looking on, he saw the rich men cast their gifts into the
treasury.

21:2. And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in two brass mites.

21:3. And he said: Verily, I say to you that this poor widow hath cast
in more than they all.

21:4. For all these have of their abundance cast into the offerings of
God: but she of her want hath cast in all the living that she had.

21:5. And some saying of the temple that it was adorned with goodly
stones and gifts, he said:

21:6. These things which you see, the days will come in which there
shall not be left a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down.

21:7. And they asked him, saying: Master, when shall these things be?
And what shall be the sign when they shall begin to come to pass?

21:8. Who said: Take heed you be not seduced: for many will come in my
name, saying: I am he and the time is at hand. Go ye not therefore
after them.

21:9. And when you shall hear of wars and seditions, be not terrified.
These things must first come to pass: but the end is not yet presently.

21:10. Then he said to them: Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom.

21:11. And there shall be great earthquakes in divers places and
pestilences and famines and terrors from heaven: and there shall be
great signs.

21:12. But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and into
prisons, dragging you before kings and governors, for my name’s sake.

21:13. And it shall happen unto you for a testimony.

21:14. Lay it up therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before how
you shall answer:

21:15. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
adversaries shall not be able to resist and gainsay.

21:16. And you shall be betrayed by your parents and brethren and
kinsmen and friends: and some of you they will put to death.

21:17. And you shall be hated by all men for my name’s sake.

21:18. But a hair of your head shall not perish.

21:19. In your patience you shall possess your souls.

21:20. And when you shall see Jerusalem compassed about with an army,
then know that the desolation thereof is at hand.

21:21. Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains: and those
who are in the midst thereof depart out: and those who are in the
countries not enter into it.

21:22. For these are the days of vengeance, that all things may be
fulfilled, that are written.

21:23. But woe to them that are with child and give suck in those days:
for there shall be great distress in the land and wrath upon this
people.

21:24. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword and shall be led
away captives into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by
the Gentiles till the times of the nations be fulfilled.

21:25. And there shall be signs in the sun and in the moon and in the
stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, by reason of the
confusion of the roaring of the sea, and of the waves:

21:26. Men withering away for fear and expectation of what shall come
upon the whole world. For the powers of heaven shall be moved.

21:27. And then they shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with
great power and majesty.

21:28. But when these things begin to come to pass, look up and lift up
your heads, because your redemption is at hand.

21:29. And he spoke to them a similitude. See the fig tree and all the
trees:

21:30. When they now shoot forth their fruit, you know that summer is
nigh;

21:31. So you also, when you shall see these things come to pass, know
that the kingdom of God is at hand.

21:32. Amen, I say to you, this generation shall not pass away till all
things be fulfilled.

21:33. Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass
away.

21:34. And take heed to yourselves, lest perhaps your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness and the cares of this life:
and that day come upon you suddenly.

21:35. For as a snare shall it come upon all that sit upon the face of
the whole earth.

21:36. Watch ye, therefore, praying at all times, that you may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that are to come and to
stand before the Son of man.

21:37. And in the daytime, he was teaching in the temple: but at night
going out, he abode in the mount that is called Olivet.

21:38. And all the people came early in the morning to him in the
temple, to hear him.


Luke Chapter 22

The treason of Judas. The last supper. The first part of the history of
the passion.

22:1. Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the pasch, was
at hand.

22:2. And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put
Jesus to death: but they feared the people.

22:3. And Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariot, one of
the twelve.

22:4. And he went and discoursed with the chief priests and the
magistrates, how he might betray him to them.

22:5. And they were glad and covenanted to give him money.

22:6. And he promised. And he sought opportunity to betray him in the
absence of the multitude.

22:7. And the day of the unleavened bread came, on which it was
necessary that the pasch should be killed.

22:8. And he sent Peter and John, saying: Go, and prepare for us the
pasch, that we may eat.

22:9. But they said: Where wilt thou that we prepare?

22:10. And he said to them: Behold, as you go into the city, there
shall meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water: follow him into the
house where he entereth in.

22:11. And you shall say to the goodman of the house: The master saith
to thee: Where is the guest chamber, where I may eat the pasch with my
disciples?

22:12. And he will shew you a large dining room, furnished. And there
prepare.

22:13. And they going, found as he had said to them and made ready the
pasch.

22:14. And when the hour was come, he sat down: and the twelve apostles
with him.

22:15. And he said to them: With desire I have desired to eat this
pasch with you, before I suffer.

22:16. For I say to you that from this time I will not eat it, till it
be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.

22:17. And having taken the chalice, he gave thanks and said: Take and
divide it among you.

22:18. For I say to you that I will not drink of the fruit of the vine,
till the kingdom of God come.

22:19. And taking bread, he gave thanks and brake and gave to them,
saying: This is my body, which is given for you. Do this for a
commemoration of me.

Do this for a commemoration of me.... This sacrifice and sacrament is
to be continued in the church, to the end of the world, to shew forth
the death of Christ, until he cometh. But this commemoration, or
remembrance, is by no means inconsistent with the real presence of his
body and blood, under these sacramental veils, which represent his
death; on the contrary, it is the manner that he himself hath
commanded, of commemorating and celebrating his death, by offering in
sacrifice, and receiving in the sacrament, that body and blood by which
we were redeemed.

22:20. In like manner, the chalice also, after he had supped, saying:
This is the chalice, the new testament in my blood, which shall be shed
for you.

22:21. But yet behold: the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on
the table.

22:22. And the Son of man indeed goeth, according to that which is
determined: but yet, woe to that man by whom he shall be betrayed.

22:23. And they began to inquire among themselves, which of them it was
that should do this thing.

22:24. And there was also a strife amongst them, which of them should
seem to be the greater.

22:25. And he said to them: The kings of the Gentiles lord it over
them; and they that have power over them are called beneficent.

22:26. But you not so: but he that is the greater among you, let him
become as the younger: and he that is the leader, as he that serveth.

22:27. For which is greater, he that sitteth at table or he that
serveth? Is not he that sitteth at table? But I am in the midst of you,
as he that serveth.

22:28. And you are they who have continued with me in my temptations:

22:29. And I dispose to you, as my Father hath disposed to me, a
kingdom;

22:30. That you may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom: and may
sit upon thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

22:31. And the Lord said: Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat.

22:32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and thou,
being once converted, confirm thy brethren.

22:33. Who said to him: Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into
prison and to death.

22:34. And he said: I say to thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this
day, till thou thrice deniest that thou knowest me. And he said to
them:

22:35. When I sent you without purse and scrip and shoes, did you want
anything?

22:36. But they said: Nothing. Then said he unto them: But now he that
hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise a scrip: and he that hath
not, let him sell his coat and buy a sword.

22:37. For I say to you that this that is written must yet be fulfilled
in me. And with the wicked was he reckoned. For the things concerning
me have an end.

22:38. But they said: Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to
them: It is enough.

22:39. And going out, he went, according to his custom, to the Mount of
Olives. And his disciples also followed him.

22:40. And when he was come to the place, he said to them: Pray, lest
ye enter into temptation.

22:41. And he was withdrawn away from them a stone’s cast. And kneeling
down, he prayed.

22:42. Saying: Father, if thou wilt, remove this chalice from me: but
yet not my will, but thine be done.

22:43. And there appeared to him an angel from heaven, strengthening
him. And being in an agony, he prayed the longer.

22:44. And his sweat became as drops of blood, trickling down upon the
ground.

22:45. And when he rose up from prayer and was come to the disciples,
he found them sleeping for sorrow.

22:46. And he said to them: Why sleep you? Arise: pray: lest you enter
into temptation.

22:47. As he was yet speaking, behold a multitude; and he that was
called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them and drew near to
Jesus, for to kiss him.

22:48. And Jesus said to him: Judas, dost thou betray the Son of man
with a kiss?

22:49. And they that were about him, seeing what would follow, said to
him: Lord, shall we strike with the sword?

22:50. And one of them struck the servant of the high priest and cut
off his right ear.

22:51. But Jesus answering, said: Suffer ye thus far. And when he had
touched his ear, he healed him.

22:52. And Jesus said to the chief priests and magistrates of the
temple and the ancients, that were come unto him: Are ye come out, as
it were against a thief, with swords and clubs?

22:53. When I was daily with you in the temple, you did not stretch
forth your hands against me: but this is your hour and the power of
darkness.

22:54. And apprehending him, they led him to the high priest’s house.
But Peter followed afar off.

22:55. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall and
were sitting about it, Peter was in the midst of them.

22:56. Whom when a certain servant maid had seen sitting at the light
and had earnestly beheld him, she said: This man also was with him.

22:57. But he denied him, saying: Woman, I know him not.

22:58. And after a little while, another seeing him, said: Thou also
art one of them. But Peter said: O man, I am not.

Another, etc.... Observe here, in order to reconcile the four
Evangelists, that divers persons concurred in charging Peter with being
Christ’s disciple; till at length they brought him to deny him thrice.
1. The porteress that let him in, and afterwards seeing him at the
fire, first put the question to him; and then positively affirmed that
he was with Christ. 2. Another maid accused him to the standers by; and
gave occasion to the man here mentioned to renew the charge against
him, which caused the second denial. 3. Others of the company took
notice of his being a Galilean; and were seconded by the kinsman of
Malchus, who affirmed he had seen him in the garden. And this drew on
the third denial.

22:59. And after the space, as it were of one hour, another certain man
affirmed, saying: Of a truth, this man was also with him: for he is
also a Galilean.

22:60. And Peter said: Man, I know not what thou sayest. And
immediately, as he was yet speaking, the cock crew.

22:61. And the Lord turning looked on Peter. And Peter remembered the
word of the Lord, as he had said: Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny
me thrice.

22:62. And Peter going out, wept bitterly.

22:63. And the men that held him mocked him and struck him.

22:64. And they blindfolded him and smote his face. And they asked him
saying: Prophesy: Who is it that struck thee?

22:65. And blaspheming, many other things they said against him.

22:66. And as soon as it was day, the ancients of the people and the
chief priests and scribes came together. And they brought him into
their council saying: If thou be the Christ, tell us.

22:67. And he saith to them: If I shall tell you, you will not believe
me.

22:68. And if I shall also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me
go.

22:69. But hereafter the Son of man shall be sitting on the right hand
of the power of God.

22:70. Then said they all: Art thou then the Son of God? Who said: You
say that I am.

22:71. And they said: What need we any further testimony? For we
ourselves have heard it from his own mouth.


Luke Chapter 23

The continuation of the history of the passion.

23:1. And the whole multitude of them, rising up, led him to Pilate.

23:2. And they began to accuse him, saying: We have found this man
perverting our nation and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar and
saying that he is Christ the king.

23:3. And Pilate asked him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? But
he answering, said: Thou sayest it.

23:4. And Pilate said to the chief priests and to the multitudes: I
find no cause in this man.

23:5. But they were more earnest, saying: He stirreth up the people,
teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee to this place.

23:6. But Pilate hearing Galilee, asked if the man were of Galilee?

23:7. And when he understood that he was of Herod’s jurisdiction, he
sent him away to Herod, who was also himself at Jerusalem in those
days.

23:8. And Herod seeing Jesus, was very glad: for he was desirous of a
long time to see him, because he had heard many things of him; and he
hoped to see some sign wrought by him.

23:9. And he questioned him in many words. But he answered him nothing.

23:10. And the chief priests and the scribes stood by, earnestly
accusing him.

23:11. And Herod with his army set him at nought and mocked him,
putting on him a white garment: and sent him back to Pilate.

23:12. And Herod and Pilate were made friends, that same day: for
before they were enemies one to another.

23:13. And Pilate, calling together the chief priests and the
magistrates and the people,

23:14. Said to them: You have presented unto me this man as one that
perverteth the people. And behold I, having examined him before you,
find no cause in this man, in those things wherein you accuse him.

23:15. No, nor Herod neither. For, I sent you to him: and behold,
nothing worthy of death is done to him.

23:16. I will chastise him therefore and release him.

23:17. Now of necessity he was to release unto them one upon the feast
day.

23:18. But the whole multitude together cried out, saying: Away with
this man, and release unto us Barabbas:

23:19. Who, for a certain sedition made in the city and for a murder,
was cast into prison.

23:20. And Pilate again spoke to them, desiring to release Jesus.

23:21. But they cried again, saying: Crucify him, Crucify him.

23:22. And he said to them the third time: Why, what evil hath this man
done? I find no cause of death in him. I will chastise him therefore
and let him go.

23:23. But they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might
be crucified. And their voices prevailed.

23:24. And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.

23:25. And he released unto them him who for murder and sedition had
been cast into prison, whom they had desired. But Jesus he delivered up
to their will.

23:26. And as they led him away, they laid hold of one Simon of Cyrene,
coming from the country; and they laid the cross on him to carry after
Jesus.

23:27. And there followed him a great multitude of people and of women,
who bewailed and lamented him.

23:28. But Jesus turning to them, said: Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not over me; but weep for yourselves and for your children.

23:29. For behold, the days shall come, wherein they will say: Blessed
are the barren and the wombs that have not borne and the paps that have
not given suck.

23:30. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains: Fall upon us. And
to the hills: Cover us.

23:31. For if in the green wood they do these things, what shall be
done in the dry?

23:32. And there were also two other malefactors led with him to be put
to death.

23:33. And when they were come to the place which is called Calvary,
they crucified him there: and the robbers, one on the right hand, and
the other on the left.

23:34. And Jesus said: Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do. But they, dividing his garments, cast lots.

23:35. And the people stood beholding. And the rulers with them derided
him, saying: He saved others: let him save himself, if he be Christ,
the elect of God.

23:36. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering him
vinegar,

23:37. And saying: If thou be the king of the Jews, save thyself.

23:38. And there was also a superscription written over him in letters
of Greek and Latin and Hebrew THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

23:39. And one of those robbers who were hanged blasphemed him, saying:
If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

23:40. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying: Neither dost thou
fear God, seeing; thou art under the same condemnation?

23:41. And we indeed justly: for we receive the due reward of our
deeds. But this man hath done no evil.

23:42. And he said to Jesus: Lord, remember me when thou shalt come
into thy kingdom.

23:43. And Jesus said to him: Amen I say to thee: This day thou shalt
be with me in paradise.

In paradise.... That is, in the happy state of rest, joy, and peace
everlasting. Christ was pleased, by a special privilege, to reward the
faith and confession of the penitent thief, with a full discharge of
all his sins, both as to the guilt and punishment; and to introduce him
immediately after death into the happy society of the saints, whose
limbo, that is, the place of their confinement, was now made a paradise
by our Lord’s going thither.

23:44. And it was almost the sixth hour: and there was darkness over
all the earth until the ninth hour.

23:45. And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in
the midst.

23:46. And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said: Father, into thy hands
I commend my spirit. And saying this, he gave up the ghost.

23:47. Now, the centurion, seeing what was done, glorified God, saying:
Indeed this was a just man.

23:48. And all the multitude of them that were come together to that
sight and saw the things that were done returned, striking their
breasts.

23:49. And all his acquaintance and the women that had followed him
from Galilee stood afar off, beholding these things.

23:50. And behold there was a man named Joseph who was a counsellor, a
good and a just man,

23:51. (The same had not consented to their counsel and doings) of
Arimathea, a city of Judea: who also himself looked for the kingdom of
God.

23:52. This man went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.

23:53. And taking him down, he wrapped him in fine linen and laid him
in a sepulchre that was hewed in stone, wherein never yet any man had
been laid.

23:54. And it was the day of the Parasceve: and the sabbath drew on.

Parasceve.... That is, the eve, or day of preparation for the sabbath.

23:55. And the women that were come with him from Galilee, following
after, saw the sepulchre and how his body was laid.

23:56. And returning, they prepared spices and ointments: and on the
sabbath day they rested, according to the commandment.


Luke Chapter 24

Christ’s resurrection and manifestation of himself to his disciples.

24:1. And on the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they
came to the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared.

24:2. And they found the stone rolled back from the sepulchre.

24:3. And going in, they found not the body of the Lord Jesus.

24:4. And it came to pass, as they were astonished in their mind at
this, behold, two men stood by them, in shining apparel.

24:5. And as they were afraid and bowed down their countenance towards
the ground, they said unto them: Why seek you the living with the dead?

24:6. He is not here, but is risen. Remember how he spoke unto you,
when he was yet in Galilee,

24:7. Saying: The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men and be crucified and the third day rise again.

24:8. And they remembered his words.

24:9. And going back from the sepulchre, they told all these things to
the eleven and to all the rest.

24:10. And it was Mary Magdalen and Joanna and Mary of James and the
other women that were with them, who told these things to the apostles.

24:11. And these words seemed to them as idle tales: and they did not
believe them.

24:12. But Peter rising up, ran to the sepulchre and, stooping down, he
saw the linen cloths laid by themselves: and went away wondering in
himself at that which was come to pass.

24:13. And behold, two of them went, the same day, to a town which was
sixty furlongs from Jerusalem, named Emmaus.

24:14. And they talked together of all these things which had happened.

24:15. And it came to pass that while they talked and reasoned with
themselves, Jesus himself also, drawing near, went with them.

24:16. But their eyes were held, that they should not know him.

24:17. And he said to them: What are these discourses that you hold one
with another as you walk and are sad?

24:18. And the one of them, whose name was Cleophas, answering, said to
him: Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the
things that have been done there in these days?

24:19. To whom he said: What things? And they said: Concerning Jesus of
Nazareth, who was a prophet, mighty in work and word before God and all
the people.

24:20. And how our chief priests and princes delivered him to be
condemned to death and crucified him.

24:21. But we hoped that it was he that should have redeemed Israel.
And now besides all this, to-day is the third day since these things
were done.

24:22. Yea and certain women also of our company affrighted us who,
before it was light, were at the sepulchre,

24:23. And not finding his body, came, saying that they had also seen a
vision of angels, who say that he is alive.

24:24. And some of our people went to the sepulchre and found it so as
the women had said: but him they found not.

24:25. Then he said to them: O foolish and slow of heart to believe in
all things, Which the prophets have spoken.

24:26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and so, to enter
into his glory?

24:27. And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded to
them in all the scriptures the things that were concerning him.

24:28. And they drew nigh to the town whither they were going: and he
made as though he would go farther.

24:29. But they constrained him, saying: Stay with us, because it is
towards evening and the day is now far spent. And he went in with them.

24:30. And it came to pass, whilst he was at table with them, he took
bread and blessed and brake and gave to them.

24:31. And their eyes were opened: and they knew him. And he vanished
out of their sight.

24:32. And they said one to the other: Was not our heart burning within
us, whilst he spoke in the way and opened to us the scriptures?

24:33. And rising up, the same hour, they went back to Jerusalem: and
they found the eleven gathered together, and those that were with them,

24:34. Saying: The Lord is risen indeed and hath appeared to Simon.

24:35. And they told what things were done in the way: and how they
knew him in the breaking of bread.

24:36. Now, whilst they were speaking these things, Jesus stood in the
midst of them and saith to them: Peace be to you. It is I: Fear not.

24:37. But they being troubled and frightened, supposed that they saw a
spirit.

24:38. And he said to them: Why are you troubled, and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts?

24:39. See my hands and feet, that it is I myself. Handle, and see: for
a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me to have.

24:40. And when he had said this, he shewed them his hands and feet.

24:41. But while they yet believed not and wondered for joy, he said:
Have you here any thing to eat?

24:42. And they offered him a piece of a broiled fish and a honeycomb.

24:43. And when he had eaten before them, taking the remains, he gave
to them.

24:44. And he said to them: These are the words which I spoke to you
while I was yet with you, that all things must needs be fulfilled which
are written in the law of Moses and in the prophets and in the psalms,
concerning me.

24:45. Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand
the scriptures.

24:46. And he said to them: Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer and to rise again from the dead, the third day:

24:47. And that penance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name, unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

24:48. And you are witnesses of these things.

24:49. And I send the promise of my Father upon you: but stay you in
the city till you be endued with power from on high.

The promise of my Father.... that is, the Holy Ghost, whom Christ had
promised that his Father and he would send, John 14. 26, and 17. 7.

24:50. And he led them out as far as Bethania: and lifting up his
hands, he blessed them.

24:51. And it came to pass, whilst he blessed them, he departed from
them and was carried up to heaven.

24:52. And they adoring went back into Jerusalem with great joy.

24:53. And they were always in the temple, praising and blessing God.
Amen.




THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN


St. John the Apostle and Evangelist was the son of Zebedee and Salome,
brother to James the Greater. He was called the Beloved disciple of
Christ and stood by at his Crucifixion. He wrote the Gospel after the
other Evangelists, about sixty-three years after our Lord’s Ascension.
Many things that they had omitted were supplied by him. The original
was written in Greek; and by the Greeks he is titled: The Divine. St.
Jerome relates that, when he was earnestly requested by the brethren to
write the Gospel, he answered he would do it, if by ordering a common
fast, they would all put up their prayers together to the Almighty God;
which being ended replenished with the clearest and fullest revelation
coming from Heaven, he burst forth into that preface: IN THE BEGINNING
WAS THE WORD.


John Chapter 1

The divinity and incarnation of Christ. John bears witness of him. He
begins to call his disciples.

1:1. In the beginning was the Word: and the Word was with God: and the
Word was God.

1:2. The same was in the beginning with God.

1:3. All things were made by him: and without him was made nothing that
was made.

1:4. In him was life: and the life was the light of men.

1:5. And the light shineth in darkness: and the darkness did not
comprehend it.

1:6. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

1:7. This man came for a witness, to give testimony of the light, that
all men might believe through him.

1:8. He was not the light, but was to give testimony of the light.

1:9. That was the true light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh
into this world.

1:10. He was in the world: and the world was made by him: and the world
knew him not.

1:11. He came unto his own: and his own received him not.

1:12. But as many as received him, he gave them power to be made the
sons of God, to them that believe in his name.

1:13. Who are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God.

1:14. And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us (and we saw his
glory, the glory as it were of the only begotten of the Father), full
of grace and truth.

1:15. John beareth witness of him and crieth out, saying: This was he
of whom I spoke: He that shall come after me is preferred before me:
because he was before me.

1:16. And of his fulness we all have received: and grace for grace.

1:17. For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.

1:18. No man hath seen God at any time: the only begotten Son who is in
the Bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.

1:19. And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent from
Jerusalem priests and Levites to him, to ask him: Who art thou?

1:20. And he confessed and did not deny: and he confessed: I am not the
Christ.

1:21. And they asked him: What then? Art thou Elias? And he said: I am
not. Art thou the prophet? And he answered: No.

1:22. They said therefore unto him: Who art thou, that we may give an
answer to them that sent us? What sayest thou of thyself?

1:23. He said: I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, make
straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Isaias.

1:24. And they that were sent were of the Pharisees.

1:25. And they asked him and said to him: Why then dost thou baptize,
if thou be not Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet?

1:26. John answered them, saying: I baptize with water: but there hath
stood one in the midst of you, whom you know not.

1:27. The same is he that shall come after me, who is preferred before
me: the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to loose.

1:28. These things were done in Bethania, beyond the Jordan, where John
was baptizing.

1:29. The next day, John saw Jesus coming to him; and he saith: Behold
the Lamb of God. Behold him who taketh away the sin of the world.

1:30. This is he of whom I said: After me there cometh a man, who is
preferred before me: because he was before me.

1:31. And I knew him not: but that he may be made manifest in Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with water.

1:32. And John gave testimony, saying: I saw the Spirit coming down, as
a dove from heaven; and he remained upon him.

1:33. And I knew him not: but he who sent me to baptize with water said
to me: He upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining
upon him, he it is that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

1:34. And I saw: and I gave testimony that this is the Son of God.

1:35. The next day again John stood and two of his disciples.

1:36. And beholding Jesus walking, he saith: Behold the Lamb of God.

1:37. And the two disciples heard him speak: and they followed Jesus.

1:38. And Jesus turning and seeing them following him, saith to them:
What seek you? Who said to him: Rabbi (which is to say, being
interpreted, Master), where dwellest thou?

1:39. He saith to them: Come and see. They came and saw where he abode:
and they stayed with him that day. Now it was about the tenth hour.

1:40. And Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who
had heard of John and followed him.

1:41. He findeth first his brother Simon and saith to him: We have
found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.

1:42. And he brought him to Jesus. And Jesus looking upon him, said:
Thou art Simon the son of Jona. Thou shalt be called Cephas, which is
interpreted Peter.

1:43. On the following day, he would go forth into Galilee: and he
findeth Philip, And Jesus saith to him: follow me.

1:44. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

1:45. Philip findeth Nathanael and saith to him: We have found him of
whom Moses, in the law and the prophets did write, Jesus the son of
Joseph of Nazareth.

1:46. And Nathanael said to him: Can any thing of good come from
Nazareth? Philip saith to him: Come and see.

1:47. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and he saith of him: Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.

1:48. Nathanael saith to him: Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered
and said to him: Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under
the fig tree, I saw thee.

1:49. Nathanael answered him and said: Rabbi: Thou art the Son of God.
Thou art the King of Israel.

1:50. Jesus answered and said to him: Because I said unto thee, I saw
thee under the fig tree, thou believest: greater things than these
shalt thou see.

1:51. And he saith to him: Amen, amen, I say to you, you shall see the
heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the
Son of man.


John Chapter 2

Christ changes water into wine. He casts the sellers out of the temple.

2:1. And the third day, there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee: and
the mother of Jesus was there.

2:2. And Jesus also was invited, and his disciples, to the marriage.

2:3. And the wine failing, the mother of Jesus saith to him: They have
no wine.

2:4. And Jesus saith to her: Woman, what is that to me and to thee? My
hour is not yet come.

What is that to me, etc.... These words of our Saviour, spoken to his
mother, have been understood by some commentators as harsh, they not
considering the next following verse: Whatsoever he shall say to you,
do ye, which plainly shows that his mother knew of the miracle that he
was to perform, and that it was at her request he wrought it; besides
the manner of speaking the words as to the tone, and the countenance
shown at the same time, which could only be known to those who were
present, or from what had followed: for words indicating anger in one
tone of voice, would be understood quite the reverse in another.

2:5. His mother saith to the waiters: Whatsoever he shall say to you,
do ye.

2:6. Now there were set there six waterpots of stone, according to the
manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three measures
apiece.

2:7. Jesus saith to them: Fill the waterpots with water. And they
filled them up to the brim.

2:8. And Jesus saith to them: Draw out now and carry to the chief
steward of the feast. And they carried it.

2:9. And when the chief steward had tasted the water made wine and knew
not whence it was, but the waiters knew who had drawn the water: the
chief steward calleth the bridegroom,

2:10. And saith to him: Every man at first setteth forth good wine, and
when men have well drunk, then that which is worse. But thou hast kept
the good wine until now.

2:11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee and
manifested his glory. And his disciples believed in him.

2:12. After this, he went down to Capharnaum, he and his mother and his
brethren and his disciples: and they remained there not many days.

2:13. And the pasch of the Jews was at hand: and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.

2:14. And he found in the temple them that sold oxen and sheep and
doves, and the changers of money sitting.

2:15. And when he had made, as it were, a scourge of little cords, he
drove them all out of the temple, the sheep also and the oxen: and the
money of the changers he poured out, and the tables he overthrew.

2:16. And to them that sold doves he said: Take these things hence, and
make not the house of my Father a house of traffic.

2:17. And his disciples remembered, that it was written: The zeal of
thy house hath eaten me up.

2:18. The Jews, therefore, answered, and said to him: What sign dost
thou shew unto us, seeing thou dost these things?

2:19. Jesus answered and said to them: Destroy this temple; and in
three days I will raise it up.

2:20. The Jews then said: Six and forty years was this temple in
building; and wilt thou raise it up in three days?

2:21. But he spoke of the temple of his body.

2:22. When therefore he was risen again from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he had said this: and they believed the scripture and
the word that Jesus had said.

2:23. Now when he was at Jerusalem, at the pasch, upon the festival
day, many believed in his name, seeing his signs which he did.

2:24. But Jesus did not trust himself unto them: for that he knew all
men,

2:25. And because he needed not that any should give testimony of man:
for he knew what was in man.


John Chapter 3

Christ’s discourse with Nicodemus. John’s testimony.

3:1. And there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of
the Jews.

3:2. This man came to Jesus by night and said to him: Rabbi, we know
that thou art come a teacher from God; for no man can do these signs
which thou dost, unless God be with him.

3:3. Jesus answered and said to him: Amen, amen, I say to thee, unless
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

3:4. Nicodemus saith to him: How can a man be born when he is old? Can
he enter a second time into his mother’s womb and be born again?

3:5. Jesus answered: Amen, amen, I say to thee, unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God.

Unless a man be born again, etc.... By these words our Saviour hath
declared the necessity of baptism; and by the word water it is evident
that the application of it is necessary with the words. Matt. 28. 19.

3:6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born
of the Spirit is spirit.

3:7. Wonder not that I said to thee: You must be born again.

3:8. The Spirit breatheth where he will and thou hearest his voice: but
thou knowest not whence he cometh and whither he goeth. So is every one
that is born of the Spirit.

3:9. Nicodemus answered and said to him: How can these things be done?

3:10. Jesus answered and said to him: Art thou a master in Israel, and
knowest not these things?

3:11. Amen, amen, I say to thee that we speak what we know and we
testify what we have seen: and you receive not our testimony.

3:12. If I have spoken to you earthly things, and you believe not: how
will you believe, if I shall speak to you heavenly things?

3:13. And no man hath ascended into heaven, but he that descended from
heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven.

3:14. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son
of man be lifted up:

3:15. That whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but may have life
everlasting.

3:16. For God so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son:
that whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but may have life
everlasting.

3:17. For God sent not his Son into the world, to judge the world: but
that the world may be saved by him.

3:18. He that believeth in him is not judged. But he that doth not
believe is already judged: because he believeth not in the name of the
only begotten Son of God.

Is not judged.... He that believeth, viz., by a faith working through
charity, is not judged, that is, is not condemned; but the obstinate
unbeliever is judged, that is, condemned already, by retrenching
himself from the society of Christ and his church.

3:19. And this is the judgment: Because the light is come into the
world and men loved darkness rather than the light: for their works
were evil.

The judgment.... That is, the cause of his comdemnation.

3:20. For every one that doth evil hateth the light and cometh not to
the light, that his works may not be reproved.

3:21. But he that doth truth cometh to the light, that his works may be
made manifest: because they are done in God.

He that doth truth.... that is, he that acteth according to truth,
which here signifies the Law of God. Thy law is truth. Psa. 118. 142.

3:22. After these things, Jesus and his disciples came into the land of
Judea: and there he abode with them and baptized.

3:23. And John also was baptizing in Ennon near Salim: because there
was much water there. And they came and were baptized.

3:24. For John was not yet cast into prison.

3:25. And there arose a question between some of John’s disciples and
the Jews, concerning purification.

3:26. And they came to John and said to him: Rabbi, he that was with
thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou gavest testimony: behold, he
baptizeth and all men come to him.

3:27. John answered and said: A man cannot receive any thing, unless it
be given him from heaven.

3:28. You yourselves do bear me witness that I said, I am not Christ,
but that I am sent before him.

3:29. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, who standeth and heareth Him, rejoiceth with joy because of
the bridegroom’s voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled.

3:30. He must increase: but I must decrease.

3:31. He that cometh from above is above all. He that is of the earth,
of the earth he is, and of the earth he speaketh. He that cometh from
heaven is above all.

3:32. And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth: and no man
receiveth his testimony.

3:33. He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God
is true.

3:34. For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for God doth
not give the Spirit by measure.

3:35. The Father loveth the Son: and he hath given all things into his
hand.

3:36. He that believeth in the Son hath life everlasting: but he that
believeth not the Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abideth
on him.


John Chapter 4

Christ talks with the Samaritan woman. He heals the ruler’s son.

4:1. When Jesus therefore understood that the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus maketh more disciples and baptizeth more than John,

4:2. (Though Jesus himself did not baptize, but his disciples),

4:3. He left Judea and went again into Galilee.

4:4. And he was of necessity to pass through Samaria.

4:5. He cometh therefore to a city of Samaria, which is called Sichar,
near the land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

4:6. Now Jacob’s well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with
his journey, sat thus on the well. It was about the sixth hour.

4:7. There cometh a woman of Samaria, to draw water. Jesus saith to
her: Give me to drink.

4:8. For his disciples were gone into the city to buy meats.

4:9. Then that Samaritan woman saith to him: How dost thou, being a
Jew; ask of me to drink, who am a Samaritan woman? For the Jews do not
communicate with the Samaritans.

4:10. Jesus answered and said to her: If thou didst know the gift of
God and who he is that saith to thee: Give me to drink; thou perhaps
wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.

4:11. The woman saith to him: Sir, thou hast nothing wherein to draw,
and the well is deep. From whence then hast thou living water?

4:12. Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and
drank thereof, himself and his children and his cattle?

4:13. Jesus answered and said to her: Whosoever drinketh of this water
shall thirst again: but he that shall drink of the water that I will
give him shall not thirst for ever.

4:14. But the water that I will give him shall become in him a fountain
of water, springing up into life everlasting.

4:15. The woman said to him: Sir, give me this water, that I may not
thirst, nor come hither to draw.

4:16. Jesus saith to her: Go, call thy husband, and come hither.

4:17. The woman answered and said: I have no husband. Jesus said to
her: Thou hast said well: I have no husband.

4:18. For thou hast had five husbands: and he whom thou now hast is not
thy husband. This, thou hast said truly.

4:19. The woman saith to him: Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.

4:20. Our fathers adored on this mountain: and you say that at
Jerusalem is the place where men must adore.

This mountain.... Garizim, where the Samaritans had their schismatical
temple.

4:21. Jesus saith to her: Woman, believe me that the hour cometh, when
you shall neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, adore the Father.

4:22. You adore that which you know not: we adore that which we know.
For salvation is of the Jews.

4:23. But the hour cometh and now is, when the true adorers shall adore
the Father in spirit and in truth. For the Father also seeketh such to
adore him.

4:24. God is a spirit: and they that adore him must adore him in spirit
and in truth.

4:25. The woman saith to him: I know that the Messias cometh (who is
called Christ): therefore, when he is come, he will tell us all things.

4:26. Jesus saith to her: I am he, who am speaking with thee.

4:27. And immediately his disciples came. And they wondered that he
talked with the woman. Yet no man said: What seekest thou? Or: Why
talkest thou with her?

4:28. The woman therefore left her waterpot and went her way into the
city and saith to the men there:

4:29. Come, and see a man who has told me all things whatsoever I have
done. Is not he the Christ?

4:30. They went therefore out of the city and came unto him.

4:31. In the mean time, the disciples prayed him, saying: Rabbi, eat.

4:32. But he said to them: I have meat to eat which you know not.

4:33. The disciples therefore said one to another: Hath any man brought
him to eat?

4:34. Jesus saith to them: My meat is to do the will of him that sent
me, that I may perfect his work.

4:35. Do not you say: There are yet four months, and then the harvest
cometh? Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes, and see the countries.
For they are white already to harvest.

4:36. And he that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life
everlasting: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice
together.

4:37. For in this is the saying true: That it is one man that soweth,
and it is another that reapeth.

4:38. I have sent you to reap that in which you did not labour. Others
have laboured: and you have entered into their labours.

4:39. Now of that city many of the Samaritans believed in him, for the
word of the woman giving testimony: He told me all things whatsoever I
have done.

4:40. So when the Samaritans were come to him, they desired that he
would tarry there. And he abode there two days.

4:41. And many more believed in him, because of his own word.

4:42. And they said to the woman: We now believe, not for thy saying:
for we ourselves have heard him and know that this is indeed the
Saviour of the world.

4:43. Now after two days, he departed thence and went into Galilee.

4:44. For Jesus himself gave testimony that a prophet hath no honour in
his own country.

4:45. And when he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him,
having seen all the things he had done at Jerusalem on the festival
day: for they also went to the festival day.

4:46. He came again therefore into Cana of Galilee, where he made the
water wine. And there was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at
Capharnaum.

4:47. He having heard that Jesus was come from Judea into Galilee, went
to him and prayed him to come down and heal his son: for he was at the
point of death.

4:48. Jesus therefore said to him: Unless you see signs and wonders,
you believe not.

4:49. The ruler saith to him: Lord, come down before that my son die.

4:50. Jesus saith to him: Go thy way. Thy son liveth. The man believed
the word which Jesus said to him and went his way.

4:51. And as he was going down, his servants met him: and they brought
word, saying, that his son lived.

4:52. He asked therefore of them the hour wherein he grew better. And
they said to him: Yesterday at the seventh hour, the fever left him.

4:53. The father therefore knew that it was at the same hour that Jesus
said to him: Thy son liveth. And himself believed, and his whole house.

4:54. This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come
out of Judea into Galilee.


John Chapter 5

Christ heals on the sabbath the man languishing thirty-eight years. His
discourse upon this occasion.

5:1. After these things was a festival day of the Jews: and Jesus went
up to Jerusalem.

5:2. Now there is at Jerusalem a pond, called Probatica, which in
Hebrew is named Bethsaida, having five porches.

Probatica.... That is, the sheep pond; either so called, because the
sheep were washed therein, that were to be offered up in sacrifice in
the temple, or because it was near the sheep gate. That this was a pond
where miracles were wrought is evident from the sacred text; and also
that the water had no natural virtue to heal, as one only of those put
in after the motion of the water was restored to health; for if the
water had the healing quality, the others would have the like benefit,
being put into it about the same time.

5:3. In these lay a great multitude of sick, of blind, of lame, of
withered: waiting for the moving of the water.

5:4. And an angel of the Lord descended at certain times into the pond
and the water was moved. And he that went down first into the pond
after the motion of the water was made whole of whatsoever infirmity he
lay under.

5:5. And there was a certain man there that had been eight and thirty
years under his infirmity.

5:6. Him when Jesus had seen lying, and knew that he had been now a
long time, he saith to him: Wilt thou be made whole?

5:7. The infirm man answered him: Sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pond. For whilst I am coming, another
goeth down before me.

5:8. Jesus saith to him: Arise, take up thy bed and walk.

5:9. And immediately the man was made whole: and he took up his bed and
walked. And it was the sabbath that day.

5:10. The Jews therefore said to him that was healed: It is the
sabbath. It is not lawful for thee to take up thy bed.

5:11. He answered them: He that made me whole, he said to me: Take up
thy bed and walk.

5:12. They asked him therefore: Who is that man who said to thee: Take
up thy bed and walk?

5:13. But he who was healed knew not who it was: for Jesus went aside
from the multitude standing in the place.

5:14. Afterwards, Jesus findeth him in the temple and saith to him:
Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, lest some worse thing happen
to thee.

5:15. The man went his way and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had
made him whole.

5:16. Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, because he did these
things on the sabbath.

5:17. But Jesus answered them: My Father worketh until now; and I work.

5:18. Hereupon therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because
he did not only break the sabbath but also said God was his Father,
making himself equal to God.

5:19. Then Jesus answered and said to them: Amen, amen, I say unto you,
the Son cannot do any thing of himself, but what he seeth the Father
doing: for what things soever he doth, these the Son also doth in like
manner.

5:20. For the Father loveth the Son and sheweth him all things which
himself doth: and greater works than these will he shew him, that you
may wonder.

5:21. For as the Father raiseth up the dead and giveth life: so the Son
also giveth life to whom he will.

5:22. For neither does the Father judge any man: but hath given all
judgment to the Son.

5:23. That all men may honour the Son, as they honour the Father. He
who honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father who hath sent him.

5:24. Amen, amen, I say unto you that he who heareth my word and
believeth him that sent me hath life everlasting: and cometh not into
judgment, but is passed from death to life.

5:25. Amen, amen, I say unto you, that the hour cometh, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that
hear shall live.

5:26. For as the Father hath life in himself, so he hath given to the
Son also to have life in himself.

5:27. And he hath given him power to do judgment, because he is the Son
of man.

5:28. Wonder not at this: for the hour cometh wherein all that are in
the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God.

5:29. And they that have done good things shall come forth unto the
resurrection of life: but they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of judgment.

Unto the resurrection of judgment.... That is, condemnation.

5:30. I cannot of myself do any thing. As I hear, so I judge. And my
judgment is just: because I seek not my own will, but the will of him
that sent me.

5:31. If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.

5:32. There is another that beareth witness of me: and I know that the
witness which he witnesseth of me is true.

5:33. You sent to John: and he gave testimony to the truth.

5:34. But I receive not testimony from man: but I say these things,
that you may be saved.

5:35. He was a burning and a shining light: and you were willing for a
time to rejoice in his light.

5:36. But I have a greater testimony than that of John: for the works
which the Father hath given me to perfect, the works themselves which I
do, give testimony of me, that the Father hath sent me.

5:37. And the Father himself who hath sent me hath given testimony of
me: neither have you heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

5:38. And you have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent,
him you believe not.

5:39. Search the scriptures: for you think in them to have life
everlasting. And the same are they that give testimony of me.

Or.... You search the scriptures. Scrutamini.... It is not a command
for all to read the scriptures; but a reproach to the Pharisees, that
reading the scriptures as they did, and thinking to find everlasting
life in them, they would not receive him to whom all those scriptures
gave testimony, and through whom alone they could have that true life.

5:40. And you will not come to me that you may have life.

5:41. I receive not glory from men.

5:42. But I know you, that you have not the love of God in you.

5:43. I am come in the name of my Father, and you receive me not: if
another shall come in his own name, him you will receive.

5:44. How can you believe, who receive glory one from another: and the
glory which is from God alone, you do not seek?

5:45. Think not that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one that
accuseth you, Moses, in whom you trust.

5:46. For if you did believe Moses, you would perhaps believe me also:
for he wrote of me.

5:47. But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my
words?


John Chapter 6

Christ feeds five thousand with five loaves. He walks upon the sea and
discourses of the bread of life.

6:1. After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is
that of Tiberias.

6:2. And a great multitude followed him, because they saw the miracles
which he did on them that were diseased.

6:3. Jesus therefore went up into a mountain: and there he sat with his
disciples.

6:4. Now the pasch, the festival day of the Jews, was near at hand.

6:5. When Jesus therefore had lifted up his eyes and seen that a very
great multitude cometh to him, he said to Philip: Whence shall we buy
bread, that these may eat?

6:6. And this he said to try him: for he himself knew what he would do.

6:7. Philip answered him: Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
sufficient for them that every one may take a little.

6:8. One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, saith to
him:

6:9. There is a boy here that hath five barley loaves and two fishes.
But what are these among so many?

6:10. Then Jesus said: Make the men sit down. Now, there was much grass
in the place. The men therefore sat down, in number about five
thousand.

6:11. And Jesus took the loaves: and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to them that were set down. In like manner also of the
fishes, as much as they would.

6:12. And when they were filled, he said to his disciples: gather up
the fragments that remain, lest they be lost.

6:13. They gathered up therefore and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley loaves which remained over and above to
them that had eaten.

6:14. Now those men, when they had seen what a miracle Jesus had done,
said: This is of a truth the prophet that is to come into the world.

6:15. Jesus therefore, when he knew that they would come to take him by
force and make him king, fled again into the mountain himself alone.

6:16. And when evening was come, his disciples went down to the sea.

6:17. And when they had gone up into a ship, they went over the sea to
Capharnaum. And it was now dark: and Jesus was not come unto them.

6:18. And the sea arose, by reason of a great wind that blew.

6:19. When they had rowed therefore about five and twenty or thirty
furlongs, they see Jesus walking upon the sea and drawing nigh to the
ship. And they were afraid.

6:20. But he saith to them: It is I. Be not afraid.

6:21. They were willing therefore to take him into the ship. And
presently the ship was at the land to which they were going.

6:22. The next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the
sea saw that there was no other ship there but one: and that Jesus had
not entered into the ship with his disciples, but that his disciples
were gone away alone.

6:23. But other ships came in from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where
they had eaten the bread, the Lord giving thanks.

6:24. When therefore the multitude saw that Jesus was not there, nor
his disciples, they took shipping and came to Capharnaum, seeking for
Jesus.

6:25. And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they
said to him: Rabbi, when camest thou hither?

6:26. Jesus answered them and said: Amen, amen, I say to you, you seek
me, not because you have seen miracles, but because you did eat of the
loaves and were filled.

6:27. Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that which
endureth unto life everlasting, which the Son of man will give you. For
him hath God, the Father, sealed.

6:28. They said therefore unto him: What shall we do, that we may work
the works of God?

6:29. Jesus answered and said to them: This is the work of God, that
you believe in him whom he hath sent.

6:30. They said therefore to him: What sign therefore dost thou shew
that we may see and may believe thee? What dost thou work?

6:31. Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it is written: He
gave them bread from heaven to eat.

6:32. Then Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say to you; Moses gave you
not bread from heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from
heaven.

6:33. For the bread of God is that which cometh down from heaven and
giveth life to the world.

6:34. They said therefore unto him: Lord, give us always this bread.

6:35. And Jesus said to them: I am the bread of life. He that cometh to
me shall not hunger: and he that believeth in me shall never thirst.

6:36. But I said unto you that you also have seen me, and you believe
not.

6:37. All that the Father giveth to me shall come to me: and him that
cometh to me, I will not cast out.

6:38. Because I came down from heaven, not to do my own will but the
will of him that sent me.

6:39. Now this is the will of the Father who sent me: that of all that
he hath given me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it up again
in the last day.

6:40. And this is the will of my Father that sent me: that every one
who seeth the Son and believeth in him may have life everlasting. And I
will raise him up in the last day.

6:41. The Jews therefore murmured at him, because he had said: I am the
living bread which came down from heaven.

6:42. And they said: Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father
and mother we know? How then saith he: I came down from heaven?

6:43. Jesus therefore answered and said to them: Murmur not among
yourselves.

6:44. No man can come to me, except the Father, who hath sent me, draw
him. And I will raise him up in the last day.

Draw him.... Not by compulsion, nor by laying the free will under any
necessity, but by the strong and sweet motions of his heavenly grace.

6:45. It is written in the prophets: And they shall all be taught of
God. Every one that hath heard of the Father and hath learned cometh to
me.

6:46. Not that any man hath seen the Father: but he who is of God, he
hath seen the Father.

6:47. Amen, amen, I say unto you: He that believeth in me hath
everlasting life.

6:48. I am the bread of life.

6:49. Your fathers did eat manna in the desert: and are dead.

6:50. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven: that if any man
eat of it, he may not die.

6:51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven.

6:52. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the
bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world.

6:53. The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying: How can this
man give us his flesh to eat?

6:54. Then Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say unto you: except you
eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you shall not have
life in you.

Except you eat—and drink, etc.... To receive the body and blood of
Christ, is a divine precept, insinuated in this text; which the
faithful fulfil, though they receive but in one kind; because in one
kind they receive both body and blood, which cannot be separated from
each other. Hence, life eternal is here promised to the worthy
receiving, though but in one kind. Ver. 52. If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will give, is my
flesh for the life of the world. Ver. 58. He that eateth me, the same
also shall live by me. Ver. 59. He that eateth this bread, shall liver
for ever.

6:55. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath everlasting
life: and I will raise him up in the last day.

6:56. For my flesh is meat indeed: and my blood is drink indeed.

6:57. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me: and
I in him.

6:58. As the living Father hath sent me and I live by the Father: so he
that eateth me, the same also shall live by me.

6:59. This is the bread that came down from heaven. Not as your fathers
did eat manna and are dead. He that eateth this bread shall live for
ever.

6:60. These things he said, teaching in the synagogue, in Capharnaum.

6:61. Many therefore of his disciples, hearing it, said: This saying is
hard; and who can hear it?

6:62. But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at
this, said to them: Doth this scandalize you?

6:63. If then you shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before?

If then you shall see, etc.... Christ by mentioning his ascension, by
this instance of his power and divinity, would confirm the truth of
what he had before asserted; and at the same time correct their gross
apprehension of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, in a vulgar
and carnal manner, by letting them know he should take his whole body
living with him to heaven; and consequently not suffer it to be as they
supposed, divided, mangled, and consumed upon earth.

6:64. It is the spirit that quickeneth: the flesh profiteth nothing.
The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life.

The flesh profiteth nothing.... Dead flesh separated from the spirit,
in the gross manner they supposed they were to eat his flesh, would
profit nothing. Neither doth man’s flesh, that is to say, man’s natural
and carnal apprehension, (which refuses to be subject to the spirit,
and words of Christ,) profit any thing. But it would be the height of
blasphemy, to say the living flesh of Christ (which we receive in the
blessed sacarament, with his spirit, that is, with his soul and
divinity) profiteth nothing. For if Christ’s flesh had profitedus
nothing, he would never have taken flesh for us, nor died in us
nothing, he would never have taken flesh for us, nor died in the flesh
for us. Are spirit and life.... By proposing to you a heavenly
sacrament, in which you shall receive, in a wonderful manner, spirit,
grace, and life, in its very fountain.

6:65. But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that did not believe and who he was that
would betray him.

6:66. And he said: Therefore did I say to you that no man can come to
me, unless it be given him by my Father.

6:67. After this, many of his disciples went back and walked no more
with him.

6:68. Then Jesus said to the twelve: Will you also go away?

6:69. And Simon Peter answered him: Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou
hast the words of eternal life.

6:70. And we have believed and have known that thou art the Christ, the
Son of God.

6:71. Jesus answered them: Have not I chosen you twelve? And one of you
is a devil.

6:72. Now he meant Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon: for this same was
about to betray him, whereas he was one of the twelve.


John Chapter 7

Christ goes up to the feast of the tabernacles. He teaches in the
temple.

7:1. After these things, Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk
in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.

7:2. Now the Jews feast of tabernacles was at hand.

7:3. And his brethren said to, him: Pass from hence and go into Judea,
that thy disciples also may see thy works which thou dost.

7:4. For there is no man that doth any thing in secret, and he himself
seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, manifest thyself
to the world.

7:5. For neither did his brethren believe in him.

7:6. Then Jesus said to them: My time is not yet come; but your time is
always ready.

7:7. The world cannot hate you: but me it hateth, because I give
testimony of it, that the works thereof are evil,

7:8. Go you up to this festival day: but I go not up to this festival
day, because my time is not accomplished.

7:9. When he had said these things, he himself stayed in Galilee.

7:10. But after his brethren were gone up, then he also went up to the
feast, not openly, but, as it were, in secret.

7:11. The Jews therefore sought him on the festival day and said: Where
is he?

7:12. And there was much murmuring among the multitude concerning him.
For some said: He is a good man. And others said: No, but he seduceth
the people.

7:13. Yet no man spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews.

7:14. Now, about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple
and taught.

7:15. And the Jews wondered, saying: How doth this man know letters,
having never learned?

7:16. Jesus answered them and said: My doctrine is not mine, but his
that sent me.

7:17. If any man will do the will of him, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

7:18. He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that
seeketh the glory of him that sent him, he is true and there is no
injustice in him.

7:19. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the
law?

7:20. Why seek you to kill me? The multitude answered and said: Thou
hast a devil. Who seeketh to kill thee?

7:21. Jesus answered and said to them: One work I have done: and you
all wonder.

7:22. Therefore, Moses gave you circumcision (not because it is of
Moses, but of the fathers): and on the sabbath day you circumcise a
man.

7:23. If a man receive circumcision on the sabbath day, that the law of
Moses may not be broken: are you angry at me, because I have healed the
whole man on the sabbath day?

7:24. Judge not according to the appearance: but judge just judgment.

7:25. Some therefore of Jerusalem said: Is not this he whom they seek
to kill?

7:26. And behold, he speaketh openly: and they say nothing to him. Have
the rulers known for a truth that this is the Christ?

7:27. But we know this man, whence he is: but when the Christ cometh,
no man knoweth, whence he is.

7:28. Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying: You
both know me, and you know whence I am. And I am not come of myself:
but he that sent me is true, whom you know not.

7:29. I know him, because I am from him: and he hath sent me.

7:30. They sought therefore to apprehend him: and no man laid hands on
him, because his hour was not yet come.

7:31. But of the people many believed in him and said: When the Christ
cometh, shall he do more miracles than this man doth?

7:32. The Pharisees heard the people murmuring these things concerning
him: and the rulers and Pharisees sent ministers to apprehend him.

7:33. Jesus therefore said to them: Yet a little while I am with you:
and then I go to him that sent me.

7:34. You shall seek me and shall not find me: and where I am, thither
you cannot come.

7:35. The Jews therefore said among themselves: Whither will he go,
that we shall not find him? Will he go unto the dispersed among the
Gentiles and teach the Gentiles?

7:36. What is this saying that he hath said: You shall seek me and
shall not find me? And: Where I am, you cannot come?

7:37. And on the last, and great day of the festivity, Jesus stood and
cried, saying: If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink.

7:38. He that believeth in me, as the scripture saith: Out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water.

7:39. Now this he said of the Spirit which they should receive who
believed in him: for as yet the Spirit was not given, because Jesus was
not yet glorified.

7:40. Of that multitude therefore, when they had heard these words of
his, some said: This is the prophet indeed.

7:41. Others said: This is the Christ. But some said: Doth the Christ
come out of Galilee?

7:42. Doth not the scripture say: That Christ cometh of the seed of
David and from Bethlehem the town where David was?

7:43. So there arose a dissension among the people because of him.

7:44. And some of them would have apprehended him: but no man laid
hands upon him.

7:45. The ministers therefore came to the chief priests and the
Pharisees. And they said to them: Why have you not brought him?

7:46. The ministers answered: Never did man speak like this man.

7:47. The Pharisees therefore answered them: Are you also seduced?

7:48. Hath any one of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees?

7:49. But this multitude, that knoweth not the law, are accursed.

7:50. Nicodemus said to them (he that came to him by night, who was one
of them):

7:51. Doth our law judge any man, unless it first hear him and know
what he doth?

7:52. They answered and said to him: Art thou also a Galilean? Search
the scriptures, and see that out of Galilee a prophet riseth not.

7:53. And every man returned to his own house.


John Chapter 8

The woman taken in adultery. Christ justifies his doctrine.

8:1. And Jesus went unto mount Olivet.

8:2. And early in the morning he came again into the temple: and all
the people came to him. And sitting down he taught them.

8:3. And the scribes and Pharisees bring unto him a woman taken in
adultery: and they set her in the midst,

8:4. And said to him: Master, this woman was even now taken in
adultery.

8:5. Now Moses in the law commanded us to stone such a one. But what
sayest thou?

8:6. And this they said tempting him, that they might accuse him. But
Jesus bowing himself down, wrote with his finger on the ground.

8:7. When therefore they continued asking him, he lifted up himself and
said to them: He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a
stone at her.

8:8. And again stooping down, he wrote on the ground.

8:9. But they hearing this, went out one by one, beginning at the
eldest. And Jesus alone remained, and the woman standing in the midst.

8:10. Then Jesus lifting up himself, said to her: Woman, where are they
that accused thee? Hath no man condemned thee?

8:11. Who said: No man, Lord. And Jesus said: Neither will I condemn
thee. Go, and now sin no more.

8:12. Again therefore, Jesus spoke to: them, saying: I am the light of
the world. He that followeth me walketh not in darkness, but shall have
the light of life.

8:13. The Pharisees therefore said to him: Thou givest testimony of
thyself. Thy testimony is not true.

8:14. Jesus answered and said to them: Although I give testimony of
myself, my testimony is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I
go: but you know not whence I come, or whither I go.

8:15. You judge according to the flesh: I judge not any man.

8:16. And if I do judge, my judgment is true: because I am not alone,
but I and the Father that sent me.

8:17. And in your law it is written that the testimony of two men is
true.

8:18. I am one that give testimony of myself: and the Father that sent
me giveth testimony of me.

8:19. They said therefore to him: Where is thy Father? Jesus answered:
Neither me do you know, nor my Father. If you did know me, perhaps you
would know my Father also.

8:20. These words Jesus spoke in the treasury, teaching in the temple:
and no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.

8:21. Again therefore Jesus said to them: I go: and you shall seek me.
And you shall die in your sin. Whither I go, you cannot come.

8:22. The Jews therefore said: Will he kill himself, because he said:
Whither I go you cannot come?

8:23. And he said to them: You are from beneath: I am from above. You
are of this world: I am not of this world.

8:24. Therefore I said to you that you shall die in your sins. For if
you believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sin.

8:25. They said therefore to him: Who art thou? Jesus said to them: The
beginning, who also speak unto you.

8:26. Many things I have to speak and to judge of you. But he that sent
me, is true: and the things I have heard of him, these same I speak in
the world.

8:27. And they understood not that he called God his Father.

8:28. Jesus therefore said to them: When you shall have lifted up, the
Son of man, then shall you know that I am he and that I do nothing of
myself. But as the Father hath taught me, these things I speak.

8:29. And he that sent me is with me: and he hath not left me alone.
For I do always the things that please him.

8:30. When he spoke these things, many believed in him.

8:31. Then Jesus said to those Jews who believed him: If you continue
in my word, you shall be my disciples indeed.

8:32. And you shall know the truth: and the truth shall make you free.

8:33. They answered him: We are the seed of Abraham: and we have never
been slaves to any man. How sayest thou: You shall be free?

8:34. Jesus answered them: Amen, amen, I say unto you that whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin.

8:35. Now the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the son
abideth for ever.

8:36. If therefore the son shall make you free, you shall be free
indeed.

8:37. I know that you are the children of Abraham: but you seek to kill
me, because my word hath no place in you.

8:38. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and you do the
things that you have seen with your father.

8:39. They answered and said to him: Abraham is our father. Jesus saith
to them: If you be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham.

8:40. But now you seek to kill me, a man who have spoken the truth to
you, which I have heard of God. This Abraham did not.

8:41. You do the works of your father. They said therefore to him: We
are not born of fornication: we have one Father, even God.

8:42. Jesus therefore said to them: If God were your Father, you would
indeed love me. For from God I proceeded and came. For I came not of
myself: but he sent me.

8:43. Why do you not know my speech? Because you cannot hear my word.

8:44. You are of your father the devil: and the desires of your father
you will do. He was a murderer from the beginning: and he stood not in
the truth, because truth is not in him. When he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father thereof.

8:45. But if I say the truth, you believe me not.

8:46. Which of you shall convince me of sin? If I say the truth to you,
why do you not believe me:

8:47. He that is of God heareth the words of God. Therefore you hear
them not, because you are not of God.

8:48. The Jews therefore answered and said to him: Do not we say well
that thou art a Samaritan and hast a devil?

8:49. Jesus answered: I have not a devil: but I honour my Father. And
you have dishonoured me.

8:50. But I seek not my own glory: there is one that seeketh and
judgeth.

8:51. Amen, amen, I say to you: If any man keep my word, he shall not
see death for ever.

8:52. The Jews therefore said: Now we know that thou hast a devil.
Abraham is dead, and the prophets: and thou sayest: If any man keep my
word, he shall not taste death for ever.

8:53. Art thou greater than our father Abraham who is dead? And the
prophets are dead. Whom dost thou make thyself?

8:54. Jesus answered: If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is
my Father that glorifieth me, of whom you say that he is your God.

8:55. And you have not known him: but I know him. And if I shall say
that I know him not, I shall be like to you, a liar. But I do know him
and do keep his word.

8:56. Abraham your father rejoiced that he might see my day: he saw it
and was glad.

8:57. The Jews therefore said to him: Thou art not yet fifty years old.
And hast thou seen Abraham?

8:58. Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say to you, before Abraham was
made, I AM.

8:59. They took up stones therefore to cast at him. But Jesus hid
himself and went out of the temple.


John Chapter 9

He gives sight to the man born blind.

9:1. And Jesus passing by, saw a man who was blind from his birth.

9:2. And his disciples asked him: Rabbi, who hath sinned, this man or
his parents, that he should be born blind?

9:3. Jesus answered: Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents; but
that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

9:4. I must work the works of him that sent me, whilst it is day: the
night cometh, when no man can work.

9:5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

9:6. When he had said these things, he spat on the ground and made clay
of the spittle and spread the clay upon his eyes,

9:7. And said to him: Go, wash in the pool of Siloe, which is
interpreted, Sent. He went therefore and washed: and he came seeing.

9:8. The neighbours, therefore, and they who had seen him before that
he was a beggar, said: Is not this he that sat and begged? Some said:
This is he.

9:9. But others said: No, but he is like him. But he said: I am he.

9:10. They said therefore to him: How were thy eyes opened?

9:11. He answered: That man that is called Jesus made clay and anointed
my eyes and said to me: Go to the pool of Siloe and wash. And I went: I
washed: and I see.

9:12. And they said to him: Where is he? He saith: I know not.

9:13. They bring him that had been blind to the Pharisees.

9:14. Now it was the sabbath, when Jesus made the clay and opened his
eyes.

9:15. Again therefore the Pharisees asked him how he had received his
sight. But he said to them: He put clay upon my eyes: and I washed: and
I see.

9:16. Some therefore of the Pharisees said: This man is not of God, who
keepeth not the sabbath. But others said: How can a man that is a
sinner do such miracles? And there was a division among them.

9:17. They say therefore to the blind man again: What sayest thou of
him that hath opened thy eyes? And he said: He is a prophet.

9:18. The Jews then did not believe concerning him, that he had been
blind and had received his sight, until they called the parents of him
that had received his sight,

9:19. And asked them, saying: Is this your son, who you say was born
blind? How then doth he now see?

9:20. His parents answered them and said: We know that this is our son
and that he was born blind:

9:21. But how he now seeth, we know not: or who hath opened his eyes,
we know not. Ask himself: he is of age: Let him speak for himself.

9:22. These things his parents said, because they feared the Jews: for
the Jews had already agreed among themselves that if any man should
confess him to be Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.

9:23. Therefore did his parents say: He is of age. Ask himself.

9:24. They therefore called the man again that had been blind and said
to him: Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.

9:25. He said therefore to them: If he be a sinner, I know not. One
thing I know, that whereas I was blind. now I see.

9:26. They said then to him: What did he to thee? How did he open thy
eyes?

9:27. He answered them: I have told you already, and you have heard.
Why would you hear it again? Will you also become his disciples?

9:28. They reviled him therefore and said: Be thou his disciple; but we
are the disciples of Moses.

9:29. We know that God spoke to Moses: but as to this man, we know not
from whence he is.

9:30. The man answered and said to them: why, herein is a wonderful
thing, that you know not from whence he is, and he hath opened my eyes.

9:31. Now we know that God doth not hear sinners: but if a man be a
server of God and doth his, will, him he heareth.

9:32. From the beginning of the world it hath not been heard, that any
man hath opened the eyes of one born blind.

9:33. Unless this man were of God, he could not do anything.

9:34. They answered and said to him: Thou wast wholly born in sins; and
dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.

9:35. Jesus heard that they had cast him out. And when he had found
him, he said to him: Dost thou believe in the Son of God?

9:36. He answered, and said: Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in
him?

9:37. And Jesus said to him: Thou hast both seen him; and it is he that
talketh with thee.

9:38. And he said: I believe, Lord. And falling down, he adored him.

9:39. And Jesus said: For judgment I am come into this world: that they
who see not may see; and they who see may become blind.

I am come, etc.... Not that Christ came for that end, that any one
should be made blind: but that the Jews, by the abuse of his coming,
and by their not receiving him, brought upon themselves this judgment
of blindness.

9:40. And some of the Pharisees, who were with him, heard: and they
said unto him: Are we also blind?

9:41. Jesus said to them: If you were blind, you should not have sin:
but now you say: We see. Your sin remaineth.

If you were blind, etc.... If you were invincibly ignorant, and had
neither read the scriptures, nor seen my miracles, you would not be
guilty of the sin of infidelity: but now, as you boast of your
knowledge of the scriptures, you are inexcusable.


John Chapter 10

Christ is the door and the good shepherd. He and his Father are one.

10:1. Amen, amen, I say to you: He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold but climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a
robber.

10:2. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.

10:3. To him the porter openeth: and the sheep hear his voice. And he
calleth his own sheep by name and leadeth them out.

10:4. And when he hath let out his own sheep, he goeth before them: and
the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.

10:5. But a stranger they follow not, but fly from him, because they
know not the voice of strangers.

10:6. This proverb Jesus spoke to them. But they understood not what he
spoke to them.

10:7. Jesus therefore said to them again: Amen, amen, I say to you, I
am the door of the sheep.

10:8. All others, as many as have come, are thieves and robbers: and
the sheep heard them not.

10:9. I am the door. By me, if any man enter in, he shall be saved: and
he shall go in and go out, and shall find pastures.

10:10. The thief cometh not, but for to steal and to kill and to
destroy. I am come that they may have life and may have it more
abundantly.

10:11. I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd giveth his life for
his sheep.

10:12. But the hireling and he that is not the shepherd, whose own the
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming and leaveth the sheep and flieth:
and the wolf catcheth and scattereth the sheep,

10:13. And the hireling flieth, because he is a hireling: and he hath
no care for the sheep.

10:14. I am the good shepherd: and I know mine, and mine know me.

10:15. As the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father: and I lay down
my life for my sheep.

10:16. And other sheep I have that are not of this fold: them also I
must bring. And they shall hear my voice: And there shall be one fold
and one shepherd.

10:17. Therefore doth the Father love me: because I lay down my life,
that I may take it again.

10:18. No man taketh it away from me: but I lay it down of myself. And
I have power to lay it down: and I have power to take it up again. This
commandment have I received of my Father.

10:19. A dissension rose again among the Jews for these words.

10:20. And many of them said: He hath a devil and is mad. Why hear you
him?

10:21. Others said: These are not the words of one that hath a devil.
Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?

10:22. And it was the feast of the dedication at Jerusalem: and it was
winter.

10:23. And Jesus walked in the temple, in Solomon’s porch.

10:24. The Jews therefore came round about him and said to him: How
long dost thou hold our souls in suspense? If thou be the Christ, tell
us plainly.

10:25. Jesus answered them: I speak to you, and you believe not: the
works that I do in the name of my Father, they give testimony of me.

10:26. But you do not believe, because you are not of my sheep.

10:27. My sheep hear my voice. And I know them: and they follow me.

10:28. And I give them life everlasting: and they shall not perish for
ever. And no man shall pluck them out of my hand.

10:29. That which my Father hath given me is greater than all: and no
one can snatch them out of the hand of my Father.

10:30. I and the Father are one.

I and the Father are one.... That is, one divine nature, but two
distinct persons.

10:31. The Jews then took up stones to stone him.

10:32. Jesus answered them: Many good works I have shewed you from my
Father. For which of those works do you stone me?

10:33. The Jews answered him: For a good work we stone thee not, but
for blasphemy: and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.

10:34. Jesus answered them: Is it not written in your law: I said, you
are gods?

10:35. If he called them gods to whom the word of God was spoken; and
the scripture cannot be broken:

10:36. Do you say of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into
the world: Thou blasphemest; because I said: I am the Son of God?

10:37. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.

10:38. But if I do, though you will not believe me, believe the works:
that you may know and believe that the Father is in me and I in the
Father.

10:39. They sought therefore to take him: and he escaped out of their
hands.

10:40. And he went again beyond the Jordan, into that place where John
was baptizing first. And there he abode.

10:41. And many resorted to him: and they said: John indeed did no
sign.

10:42. But all things whatsoever John said of this man were true. And
many believed in him.


John Chapter 11

Christ raises Lazarus to life. The rulers resolve to put him to death.

11:1. Now there was a certain man sick, named Lazarus, of Bethania, of
the town of Mary and of Martha her sister.

11:2. (And Mary was she that anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped
his feet with her hair: whose brother Lazarus was sick.)

11:3. His sisters therefore sent to him, saying: Lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick.

11:4. And Jesus hearing it, said to them: This sickness is not unto
death, but for the glory of God: that the Son of God may be glorified
by it.

11:5. Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister Mary and Lazarus.

11:6. When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he still remained
in the same place two days.

11:7. Then after that, he said to his disciples: Let us go into Judea
again.

11:8. The disciples say to him: Rabbi, the Jews but now sought to stone
thee. And goest thou thither again?

11:9. Jesus answered: Are there not twelve hours of the day? If a man
walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this
world:

11:10. But if he walk in the night, he stumbleth, because the light is
not in him.

11:11. These things he said; and after that he said to them: Lazarus
our friend sleepeth: but I go that I may awake him out of sleep.

11:12. His disciples therefore said: Lord, if he sleep, he shall do
well.

11:13. But Jesus spoke of his death: and they thought that he spoke of
the repose of sleep.

11:14. Then therefore Jesus said to them plainly: Lazarus is dead.

11:15. And I am glad, for your sakes; that I was not there, that you
may believe. But, let us go to him.

11:16. Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said to his fellow
disciples: Let us also go, that we may die with him.

11:17. Jesus therefore came: and found that he had been four days
already in the grave.

11:18. (Now Bethania was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.)

11:19. And many of the Jews were come to Martha and Mary, to comfort
them concerning their brother.

11:20. Martha therefore, as soon as she heard that Jesus was come, went
to meet him: but Mary sat at home.

11:21. Martha therefore said to Jesus: Lord, if thou hadst been here,
my brother had not died.

11:22. But now also I know that whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God
will give it thee.

11:23. Jesus saith to her: Thy brother shall rise again.

11:24. Martha saith to him: I know that he shall rise again, in the
resurrection at the last day.

11:25. Jesus said to her: I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believeth in me, although he be dead, shall live:

11:26. And every one that liveth and believeth in me shall not die for
ever. Believest thou this?

11:27. She saith to him: Yea, Lord, I have believed that thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God, who art come into this world.

11:28. And when she had said these things, she went and called her
sister Mary secretly, saying: The master is come and calleth for thee.

11:29. She, as soon as she heard this, riseth quickly and cometh to
him.

11:30. For Jesus was not yet come into the town: but he was still in
that place where Martha had met him.

11:31. The Jews therefore, who were with her in the house and comforted
her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up speedily and went out,
followed her, saying: She goeth to the grave to weep there.

11:32. When Mary therefore was come where Jesus was, seeing him, she
fell down at his feet and saith to him. Lord, if thou hadst been here,
my brother had not died.

11:33. Jesus, therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews that
were come with her weeping, groaned in the spirit and troubled himself,

11:34. And said: Where have you laid him? They say to him: Lord, come
and see.

11:35. And Jesus wept.

11:36. The Jews therefore said: Behold how he loved him.

11:37. But some of them said: Could not he that opened the eyes of the
man born blind have caused that this man should not die?

11:38. Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, cometh to the
sepulchre. Now it was a cave; and a stone was laid over it.

11:39. Jesus saith: Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that
was dead, saith to him: Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he is now
of four days.

11:40. Jesus saith to her: Did not I say to thee that if thou believe,
thou shalt see the glory of God?

11:41. They took therefore the stone away. And Jesus lifting up his
eyes, said: Father, I give thee thanks that thou hast heard me.

11:42. And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the
people who stand about have I said it, that they may believe that thou
hast sent me.

11:43. When he had said these things, he cried with a loud voice:
Lazarus, come forth.

11:44. And presently he that had been dead came forth, bound feet and
hands with winding bands. And his face was bound about with a napkin.
Jesus said to them: Loose him and let him go.

11:45. Many therefore of the Jews, who were come to Mary and Martha and
had seen the things that Jesus did, believed in him.

11:46. But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them the things
that Jesus had done.

11:47. The chief priests, therefore, and the Pharisees gathered a
council and said: What do we, for this man doth many miracles?

11:48. If we let him alone so, all will believe in him; and the Romans
will come, and take away our place and nation.

11:49. But one of them, named Caiphas, being the high priest that year,
said to them: You know nothing.

11:50. Neither do you consider that it is expedient for you that one
man should die for the people and that the whole nation perish not.

11:51. And this he spoke not of himself: but being the high priest of
that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the nation.

11:52. And not only for the nation, but to gather together in one the
children of God that were dispersed.

11:53. From that day therefore they devised to put him to death.

11:54. Wherefore Jesus walked no more openly among the Jews: but he
went into a country near the desert, unto a city that is called Ephrem.
And there he abode with his disciples.

11:55. And the pasch of the Jews was at hand: and many from the country
went up to Jerusalem, before the pasch, to purify themselves.

11:56. They sought therefore for Jesus; and they discoursed one with
another, standing in the temple: What think you that he is not come to
the festival day? And the chief priests and Pharisees had given a
commandment that, if any man knew where he was, he should tell, that
they might apprehend him.


John Chapter 12

The anointing of Christ’s feet. His riding into Jerusalem upon an ass.
A voice from heaven.

12:1. Jesus therefore, six days before the pasch, came to Bethania,
where Lazarus had been dead, whom Jesus raised to life.

12:2. And they made him a supper there: and Martha served. But Lazarus
was one of them that were at table with him.

12:3. Mary therefore took a pound of ointment of right spikenard, of
great price, and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her
hair. And the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.

12:4. Then one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, he that was about to
betray him, said:

12:5. Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence and given
to the poor?

12:6. Now he said this not because he cared for the poor; but because
he was a thief and, having the purse, carried the things that were put
therein.

12:7. Jesus therefore said: Let her alone, that she may keep it against
the day of my burial.

12:8. For the poor you have always with you: but me you have not
always.

See the annotation of St. Matt. 26. 11.

12:9. A great multitude therefore of the Jews knew that he was there;
and they came, not for Jesus’ sake only, but that they might see
Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.

12:10. But the chief priests thought to kill Lazarus also:

12:11. Because many of the Jews, by reason of him, went away and
believed in Jesus.

12:12. And on the next day, a great multitude that was come to the
festival day, when they had heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,

12:13. Took branches of palm trees and went forth to meet him and cried
Hosanna. Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, the king of
Israel.

12:14. And Jesus found a young ass and sat upon it, as it is written:

12:15. Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold thy king cometh, sitting on
an ass’s colt.

12:16. These things his disciples did not know at the first: but when
Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were
written of him and that they had done these things to him.

12:17. The multitude therefore gave testimony, which was with him, when
he called Lazarus out of the grave and raised him from the dead.

12:18. For which reason also the people came to meet him, because they
heard that he had done this miracle.

12:19. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves: Do you see that
we prevail nothing? Behold, the whole world is gone after him.

12:20. Now there were certain Gentiles among them, who came up to adore
on the festival day.

12:21. These therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee,
and desired him, saying: Sir, we would see Jesus.

12:22. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew. Again Andrew and Philip told
Jesus.

12:23. But Jesus answered them, saying: The hour is come that the Son
of man should be glorified.

12:24. Amen, amen, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat falling into
the ground die,

12:25. Itself remaineth alone. But if it die it bringeth forth much
fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it and he that hateth his
life in this world keepeth it unto life eternal.

12:26. If any man minister to me, let him follow me: and where I am,
there also shall my minister be. If any man minister to me, him will my
Father honour.

12:27. Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour. But for this cause I came unto this hour.

12:28. Father, glorify thy name. A voice therefore came from heaven: I
have both glorified it and will glorify it again.

12:29. The multitude therefore that stood and heard said that it
thundered. Others said: An angel spoke to him.

12:30. Jesus answered and said: This voice came not because of me, but
for your sakes.

12:31. Now is the judgment of the world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out.

12:32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all things to
myself.

12:33. (Now this he said, signifying what death he should die.)

12:34. The multitude answered him: We have heard out of the law that
Christ abideth for ever. And how sayest thou: The Son of man must be
lifted up? Who is this Son of man?

12:35. Jesus therefore said to them: Yet a little while, the light is
among you. Walk whilst you have the light, that the darkness overtake
you not. And he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.

12:36. Whilst you have the light, believe in the light, that you may be
the children of light. These things Jesus spoke: and he went away and
hid himself from them.

12:37. And whereas he had done so many miracles before them, they
believed not in him:

12:38. That the saying of Isaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which
he said: Lord, who hath believed our hearing? And to whom hath the arm
of the Lord been revealed?

12:39. Therefore they could not believe, because Isaias said again:

They could not believe.... Because they would not, saith St. Augustine,
Tract. 33, in Joan. See the annotation, St. Mark 4. 12.

12:40. He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they
should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart and be
converted: and I should heal them.

12:41. These things said Isaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of
him.

12:42. However, many of the chief men also believed in him: but because
of the Pharisees they did not confess him, that they might not be cast
out of the synagogue.

12:43. For they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God.

12:44. But Jesus cried and said: He that believeth in me doth not
believe in me, but in him that sent me.

12:45. And he that seeth me, seeth him that sent me.

12:46. I am come, a light into the world, that whosoever believeth in
me may not remain in darkness.

12:47. And if any man hear my words and keep them not, I do not judge
him for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

12:48. He that despiseth me and receiveth not my words hath one that
judgeth him. The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in
the last day.

12:49. For I have not spoken of myself: but the Father who sent me, he
gave me commandment what I should say and what I should speak.

12:50. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting. The things
therefore that I speak, even as the Father said unto me, so do I speak.


John Chapter 13

Christ washes his disciples’ feet. The treason of Judas. The new
commandment of love.

13:1. Before the festival day of the pasch, Jesus knowing that his hour
was come, that he should pass out of this world to the Father: having
loved his own who were in the world, he loved them unto the end.

Before the festival day of the pasch.... This was the fourth and last
pasch of the ministry of Christ, and according to the common
computation, was in the thirty-third year of our Lord: and in the year
of the world 4036. Some chronologers are of opinion that our Saviour
suffered in the thirty-seventh year of his age: but these different
opinions on this subject are of no consequence.

13:2. And when supper was done (the devil having now put into the heart
of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him),

13:3. Knowing that the Father had given him all things into his hands
and that he came from God and goeth to God,

13:4. He riseth from supper and layeth aside his garments and, having
taken a towel, girded himself.

13:5. After that, he putteth water into a basin and began to wash the
feet of the disciples and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was
girded.

13:6. He cometh therefore to Simon Peter. And Peter saith to him: Lord,
dost thou wash my feet?

13:7. Jesus answered and said to him: What I do, thou knowest not now;
but thou shalt know hereafter.

13:8. Peter saith to him: Thou shalt never wash my feet, Jesus answered
him: If I wash thee not, thou shalt have no part with me.

13:9. Simon Peter saith to him: Lord, not only my feet, but also my
hands and my head.

13:10. Jesus saith to him: He that is washed needeth not but to wash
his feet, but is clean wholly. And you are clean, but not all.

13:11. For he knew who he was that would betray him; therefore he said:
You are not all clean.

13:12. Then after he had washed their feet and taken his garments,
being set down again, he said to them: Know you what I have done to
you?

13:13. You call me Master and Lord. And you say well: for so I am.

13:14. If then I being your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; you
also ought to wash one another’s feet.

13:15. For I have given you an example, that as I have done to you, so
you do also.

13:16. Amen, amen, I say to you: The servant is not greater than his
lord: neither is the apostle greater than he that sent him.

13:17. If you know these things, you shall be blessed if you do them.

13:18. I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen. But that the
scripture may be fulfilled: He that eateth bread with me shall lift up
his heel against me,

13:19. At present I tell you, before it come to pass: that when it
shall come to pass, you may believe that I am he.

13:20. Amen, amen, I say to you, he that receiveth whomsoever I send
receiveth me: and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.

13:21. When Jesus had said these things, he was troubled in spirit; and
he testified, and said: Amen, amen, I say to you, one of you shall
betray me.

13:22. The disciples therefore looked one upon another, doubting of
whom he spoke.

13:23. Now there was leaning on Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples, whom
Jesus loved.

13:24. Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him and said to him: Who is it
of whom he speaketh?

13:25. He therefore, leaning on the breast of Jesus, saith to him:
Lord, who is it?

13:26. Jesus answered: He it is to whom I shall reach bread dipped. And
when he had dipped the bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of
Simon.

13:27. And after the morsel, Satan entered into him. And Jesus said to
him: That which thou dost, do quickly.

That which thou dost, do quickly.... It is not a license, much less a
command, to go about his treason: but a signification to him that
Christ would not hinder or resist what he was about, do it as soon as
he pleased: but was both ready and desirous to suffer for our
redemption.

13:28. Now no man at the table knew to what purpose he said this unto
him.

13:29. For some thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus had
said to him: Buy those things which we have need of for the festival
day: or that he should give something to the poor.

13:30. He therefore, having received the morsel, went out immediately.
And it was night.

13:31. When he therefore was gone out, Jesus said: Now is the Son of
man glorified; and God is glorified in him.

13:32. If God be glorified in him, God also will glorify him in
himself: and immediately will he glorify him.

13:33. Little children, yet a little while I am with you. You shall
seek me. And as I said to the Jews: Whither I go you cannot come; so I
say to you now.

13:34. A new commandment I give unto you: That you love one another, as
I have loved you, that you also love one another.

13:35. By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you
have love one for another.

13:36. Simon Peter saith to him: Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus
answered: Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now: but thou shalt
follow hereafter.

13:37. Peter saith to him: Why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay
down my life for thee.

13:38. Jesus answered him: Wilt thou lay down thy life for me? Amen,
amen, I say to thee, the cock shall not crow, till thou deny me thrice.


John Chapter 14

Christ’s discourse after his last supper.

14:1. Let not your heart be troubled. You believe in God: believe also
in me.

14:2. In my Father’s house there are many mansions. If not, I would
have told you: because I go to prepare a place for you.

14:3. And if I shall go and prepare a place for you, I will come again
and will take you to myself: that where I am, you also may be.

14:4. And whither I go you know: and the way you know.

14:5. Thomas saith to him: Lord, we know not whither thou goest. And
how can we know the way?

14:6. Jesus saith to him: I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No
man cometh to the Father, but by me.

14:7. If you had known me, you would without doubt have known my Father
also: and from henceforth you shall know him. And you have seen him.

14:8. Philip saith to him: Lord, shew us the Father; and it is enough
for us.

14:9. Jesus saith to him: Have I been so long a time with you and have
you not known me? Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father also. How
sayest thou: Shew us the Father?

14:10. Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father in me?
The words that I speak to you, I speak not of myself. But the Father
who abideth in me, he doth the works.

14:11. Believe you not that I am in the Father and the Father in me?

14:12. Otherwise believe for the very works’ sake. Amen, amen, I say to
you, he that believeth in me, the works that I do, he also shall do:
and greater than these shall he do.

14:13. Because I go to the Father: and whatsoever you shall ask the
Father in my name, that will I do: that the Father may be glorified in
the Son.

14:14. If you shall ask me any thing in my name, that I will do.

14:15. If you love me, keep my commandments.

14:16. And I will ask the Father: and he shall give you another
Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever:

Paraclete.... That is, a comforter: or also an advocate; inasmuch as by
inspiring prayer, he prays, as it were, in us, and pleads for us. For
ever.... Hence it is evident that this Spirit of Truth was not only
promised to the persons of the apostles, but also to their successors
through all generations.

14:17. The spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
seeth him not, nor knoweth him. But you shall know him; because he
shall abide with you and shall be in you.

14:18. I will not leave you orphans: I will come to you.

14:19. Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more. But you see
me: because I live, and you shall live.

14:20. In that day you shall know that I am in my Father: and you in
me, and I in you.

14:21. He that hath my commandments and keepeth them; he it is that
loveth me. And he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father: and I
will love him and will manifest myself to him.

14:22. Judas saith to him, not the Iscariot: Lord, how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?

14:23. Jesus answered and said to him: If any one love me, he will keep
my word. And my Father will love him and we will come to him and will
make our abode with him.

14:24. He that loveth me not keepeth not my words. And the word which
you have heard is not mine; but the Father’s who sent me.

14:25. These things have I spoken to you, abiding with you.

14:26. But the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, he will teach you all things and bring all things to your
mind, whatsoever I shall have said to you.

Teach you all things.... Here the Holy Ghost is promised to the
apostles and their successors, particularly, in order to teach them all
truth, and to preserve them from error.

14:27. Peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you: not as the
world giveth, do I give unto you. Let not your heart be troubled: nor
let it be afraid.

14:28. You have heard that I said to you: I go away, and I come unto
you. If you loved me you would indeed be glad, because I go to the
Father: for the Father is greater than I.

For the Father is greater than I.... It is evident, that Christ our
Lord speaks here of himself as he is made man: for as God he is equal
to the Father. (See Phil. 2.) Any difficulty of understanding the
meaning of these words will vanish, when the relative circumstances of
the text here are considered: for Christ being at this time shortly to
suffer death, signified to his apostles his human nature by these very
words: for as God he could not die. And therefore as he was both God
and man, it must follow that according to his humanity he was to die,
which the apostles were soon to see and believe, as he expresses, ver.
29. And now I have told you before it come to pass: that when it shall
come to pass, you may believe.

14:29. And now I have told you before it come to pass: that when it
shall come to pass, you may believe.

14:30. I will not now speak many things with you. For the prince of
this world: cometh: and in me he hath not any thing.

14:31. But that the world may know that I love the Father: and as the
Father hath given me commandment, so do I. Arise, let us go hence.


John Chapter 15

A continuation of Christ’s discourse to his disciples.

15:1. I am the true vine: and my Father is the husbandman.

15:2. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he will take away: and
every one that beareth fruit, he will purge it, that it may bring forth
more fruit.

15:3. Now you are clean, by reason of the word which I have spoken to
you.

15:4. Abide in me: and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, unless it abide in the vine, so neither can you, unless you
abide in me.

15:5. I am the vine: you the branches. He that abideth in me, and I in
him, the same beareth much fruit: for without me you can do nothing.

15:6. If any one abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as a branch
and shall wither: and they shall gather him up and cast him into the
fire: and he burneth.

15:7. If you abide in me and my words abide in you, you shall ask
whatever you will: and it shall be done unto you.

15:8. In this is my Father glorified: that you bring forth very much
fruit and become my disciples.

15:9. As the Father hath loved me, I also have loved you. Abide in my
love.

15:10. If you keep my commandments, you shall abide in my love: as I
also have kept my Father’s commandments and do abide in his love.

15:11. These things I have spoken to you, that my joy may be in you,
and your joy may be filled.

15:12. This is my commandment, that you love one another, as I have
loved you.

15:13. Greater love than this no man hath, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.

15:14. You are my friends, if you do the things that I command you.

15:15. I will not now call you servants: for the servant knoweth not
what his lord doth. But I have called you friends: because all things,
whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have made known to you.

15:16. You have not chosen me: but I have chosen you; and have
appointed you, that you should go and should bring forth fruit; and
your fruit should remain: that whatsoever you shall ask of the Father
in my name, he may give it you.

15:17. These things I command you, that you love one another.

15:18. If the world hate you, know ye that it hath hated me before you.

15:19. If you had been of the world, the world would love its own: but
because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hateth you.

15:20. Remember my word that I said to you: The servant is not greater
than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you. If they have kept my word, they will keep yours also.

15:21. But all these things they will do to you for my name’s sake:
because they know not him that sent me.

15:22. If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin:
but now they have no excuse for their sin.

15:23. He that hateth me hateth my Father also.

15:24. If I had not done among them the works that no other man hath
done, they would not have sin: but now they have both seen and hated
both me and my Father.

15:25. But that the word may be fulfilled which is written in their
law: they hated me without cause.

15:26. But when the Paraclete cometh, whom I will send you from the
Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceedeth from the Father, he shall
give testimony of me.

Whom I will send.... This proves, against the modern Greeks, that the
Holy Ghost proceedeth from the Son, as well as from the Father:
otherwise he could not be sent by the Son.

15:27. And you shall give testimony, because you are with me from the
beginning.


John Chapter 16

The conclusion of Christ’s last discourse to his disciples.

16:1. These things have I spoken to you, that you may not be
scandalized.

16:2. They will put you out of the synagogues: yea, the hour cometh,
that whosoever killeth you will think that he doth a service to God.

16:3. And these things will they do to you; because they have not known
the Father nor me.

16:4. But these things I have told you, that when the hour shall come,
you may remember that I told you of them.

16:5. But I told you not these things from the beginning, because I was
with you. And now I go to him that sent me, and none of you asketh me:
Whither goest thou?

16:6. But because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow hath filled
your heart.

16:7. But I tell you the truth: it is expedient to you that I go. For
if I go not, the Paraclete will not come to you: but if I go, I will
send him to you.

16:8. And when he is come, he will convince the world of sin and of
justice and of judgment.

He will convince the world of sin, etc.... The Holy Ghost, by his
coming brought over many thousands, first, to a sense of their sin in
not believing in Christ. Secondly, to a conviction of the justice of
Christ, now sitting at the right hand of his Father. And thirdly, to a
right apprehension of the judgment prepared for them that choose to
follow Satan, who is already judged and condemned.

16:9. Of sin: because they believed not in me.

16:10. And of justice: because I go to the Father: and you shall see me
no longer.

16:11. And of judgment: because the prince of this world is already
judged.

16:12. I have yet many things to say to you: but you cannot bear them
now.

16:13. But when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will teach you all
truth. For he shall not speak of himself: but what things soever he
shall hear, he shall speak. And the things that are to come, he shall
shew you.

Will teach you all truth.... See the annotation on chap. 14. ver. 26.

16:14. He shall glorify me: because he shall receive of mine and shall
shew it to you.

16:15. All things whatsoever the Father hath are mine. Therefore I said
that he shall receive of me and shew it to you.

16:16. A little while, and now you shall not see me: and again a little
while, and you shall see me: because I go to the Father.

16:17. Then some of his disciples said one to another: What is this
that he saith to us: A little while, and you shall not see me: and
again a little while, and you shall see me, and, Because I go to the
Father?

16:18. They said therefore: What is this that he saith, A little while?
We know not what he speaketh.

16:19. And Jesus knew that they had a mind to ask him. And he said to
them: Of this do you inquire among yourselves, because I said: A little
while, and you shall not see me; and again a little while, and you
shall see me?

16:20. Amen, amen, I say to you, that you shall lament and weep, but
the world shall rejoice: and you shall be made sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy.

16:21. A woman, when she is in labour, hath sorrow, because her hour is
come; but when she hath brought forth the child, she remembereth no
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.

16:22. So also you now indeed have sorrow: but I will see you again and
your heart shall rejoice. And your joy no man shall take from you.

16:23. And in that day you shall not ask me any thing. Amen, amen, I
say to you: if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will give it
you.

16:24. Hitherto, you have not asked any thing in my name. Ask, and you
shall receive; that your joy may be full.

16:25. These things I have spoken to you in proverbs. The hour cometh
when I will no longer speak to you in proverbs, but will shew you
plainly of the Father.

16:26. In that day, you shall ask in my name: and I say not to you that
I will ask the Father for you.

16:27. For the Father himself loveth you, because you have loved me and
have believed that I came out from God.

16:28. I came forth from the Father and am come into the world: again I
leave the world and I go to the Father.

16:29. His disciples say to him: Behold, now thou speakest plainly and
speakest no proverb.

16:30. Now we know that thou knowest all things and thou needest not
that any man should ask thee. By this we believe that thou camest forth
from God.

16:31. Jesus answered them: Do you now believe?

16:32. Behold, the hour cometh, and it is now come, that you shall be
scattered every man to his own and shall leave me alone. And yet I am
not alone, because the Father is with me.

16:33. These things I have spoken to you, that in me you may have
peace. In the world you shall have distress. But have confidence. I
have overcome the world.


John Chapter 17

Christ’s prayer for his disciples.

17:1. These things Jesus spoke: and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he
said: Father, the hour is come. Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may
glorify thee.

17:2. As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he may give
eternal life to all whom thou hast given him.

17:3. Now this is eternal life: That they may know thee, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.

17:4. I have glorified thee on the earth; I have finished the work
which thou gavest me to do.

17:5. And now glorify thou me, O Father, with thyself, with the glory
which I had, before the world was, with thee.

17:6. I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou hast given me out
of the world. Thine they were: and to me thou gavest them. And they
have kept thy word.

17:7. Now they have known that all things which thou hast given me are
from thee:

17:8. Because the words which thou gavest me, I have given to them. And
they have received them and have known in very deed that I came out
from thee: and they have believed that thou didst send me.

17:9. I pray for them. I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou
hast given me: because they are thine.

17:10. And all my things are thine, and thine are mine: and I am
glorified in them.

17:11. And now I am not in the world, and these are in the world, and I
come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name whom thou hast given
me: that they may be one, as we also are.

17:12. While I was with them, I kept them in thy name. Those whom thou
gavest me have I kept: and none of them is lost, but the son of
perdition: that the scripture may be fulfilled.

17:13. And now I come to thee: and these things I speak in the world,
that they may have my joy filled in themselves.

17:14. I have given them thy word, and the world hath hated them:
because they are not of the world, as I also am not of the world.

17:15. I pray not that thou shouldst take them out of the world, but
that thou shouldst keep them from evil.

17:16. They are not of the world, as I also am not of the world.

17:17. Sanctify them in truth. Thy word is truth.

17:18. As thou hast sent me into the world, I also have sent them into
the world.

17:19. And for them do I sanctify myself, that they also may be
sanctified in truth.

17:20. And not for them only do I pray, but for them also who through
their word shall believe in me.

17:21. That they all may be one, as thou, Father, in me, and I in thee;
that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou
hast sent me.

17:22. And the glory which thou hast given me, I have given to them:
that, they may be one, as we also are one.

17:23. I in them, and thou in me: that they may be made perfect in one:
and the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved them, as
thou hast also loved me.

17:24. Father, I will that where I am, they also whom thou hast given
me may be with me: that they may see my glory which thou hast given me,
because thou hast loved me before the creation of the world.

17:25. Just Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known
thee. And these have known that thou hast sent me.

17:26. And I have made known thy name to them and will make it known:
that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in
them.


John Chapter 18

The history of the passion of Christ.

18:1. When Jesus had said these things, he went forth with his
disciples over the brook Cedron, where there was a garden, into which
he entered with his disciples.

18:2. And Judas also, who betrayed him, knew the place: because Jesus
had often resorted thither together with his disciples.

18:3. Judas therefore having received a band of soldiers and servants
from the chief priests and the Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns
and torches and weapons.

18:4. Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him,
went forth and said to them: Whom seek ye?

18:5. They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith to them: I am
he. And Judas also, who betrayed him, stood with them.

18:6. As soon therefore as he had said to them: I am he; they went
backward and fell to the ground.

18:7. Again therefore he asked them: Whom seek ye? And they said: Jesus
of Nazareth.

18:8. Jesus answered: I have told you that I am he. If therefore you
seek me, let these go their way,

18:9. That the word might be fulfilled which he said: Of them whom thou
hast given me, I have not lost any one.

18:10. Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and struck the servant
of the high priest and cut off his right ear. And the name of the
servant was Malchus.

18:11. Jesus therefore said to Peter: Put up thy sword into the
scabbard. The chalice which my father hath given me, shall I not drink
it?

18:12. Then the band and the tribune and the servants of the Jews took
Jesus and bound him.

18:13. And they led him away to Annas first, for he was father-in-law
to Caiphas, who was the high priest of that year.

18:14. Now Caiphas was he who had given the counsel to the Jews: That
it was expedient that one man should die for the people.

18:15. And Simon Peter followed Jesus: and so did another disciple. And
that disciple was known to the high priest and went in with Jesus into
the court of the high priest.

18:16. But Peter stood at the door without. The other disciple
therefore, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the
portress and brought in Peter.

18:17. The maid therefore that was portress saith to Peter: Art not
thou also one of this man’s disciples? He saith: I am not.

18:18. Now the servants and ministers stood at a fire of coals, because
it was cold, and warmed themselves. And with them was Peter also,
standing and warming himself.

18:19. The high priest therefore asked Jesus of his disciples and of
his doctrine.

18:20. Jesus answered him: I have spoken openly to the world. I have
always taught in the synagogue and in the temple, whither all the Jews
resort: and in secret I have spoken nothing.

18:21. Why askest thou me? Ask them who have heard what I have spoken
unto them. Behold they know what things I have said.

18:22. And when he had said these things, one of the servants standing
by gave Jesus a blow, saying: Answerest thou the high priest so?

18:23. Jesus answered him: If I have spoken evil, give testimony of the
evil; but if well, why strikest thou me?

18:24. And Annas sent him bound to Caiphas the high priest.

18:25. And Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said
therefore to him: Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it
and said: I am not.

18:26. One of the servants of the high priest (a kinsman to him whose
ear Peter cut off) saith to him: Did not I see thee in the garden with
him?

18:27. Again therefore Peter denied: and immediately the cock crew.

18:28. Then they led Jesus from Caiphas to the governor’s hall. And it
was morning: and they went not into the hall, that they might not be
defiled, but that they might eat the pasch.

18:29. Pilate therefore went out to them, and said: What accusation
bring you against this man?

18:30. They answered and said to him: If he were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him up to thee.

18:31. Pilate therefore said to them: Take him you, and judge him
according to your law. The Jews therefore said to him: It is not lawful
for us to put any man to death.

18:32. That the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he said,
signifying what death he should die.

18:33. Pilate therefore went into the hall again and called Jesus and
said to him: Art thou the king of the Jews?

18:34. Jesus answered: Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or have
others told it thee of me?

18:35. Pilate answered: Am I a Jew? Thy own nation and the chief
priests have delivered thee up to me. What hast thou done?

18:36. Jesus answered: My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom
were of this world, my servants would certainly strive that I should
not be delivered to the Jews: but now my kingdom is not from hence.

18:37. Pilate therefore said to him: Art thou a king then? Jesus
answered: Thou sayest that I am a king. For this was I born, and for
this came I into the world; that I should give testimony to the truth.
Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

18:38. Pilate saith to him: What is truth? And when he said this, he
went out again to the Jews and saith to them: I find no cause in him.

18:39. But you have a custom that I should release one unto you at the
Pasch. Will you, therefore, that I release unto you the king of the
Jews?

18:40. Then cried they all again, saying: Not this man, but Barabbas.
Now Barabbas was a robber.


John Chapter 19

The continuation of the history of the Passion of Christ.

19:1. Then therefore Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.

19:2. And the soldiers platting a crown of thorns, put it upon his
head: and they put on him a purple garment.

19:3. And they came to him and said: Hail, king of the Jews. And they
gave him blows.

19:4. Pilate therefore went forth again and saith to them: Behold, I
bring him forth unto you, that you may know that I find no cause in
him.

19:5. (Jesus therefore came forth, bearing the crown of thorns and the
purple garment.) And he saith to them: Behold the Man.

19:6. When the chief priests, therefore, and the servants had seen him,
they cried out, saying: Crucify him, Crucify him. Pilate saith to them:
Take him you, and crucify him: for I find no cause in him.

19:7. The Jews answered him: We have a law; and according to the law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.

19:8. When Pilate therefore had heard this saying, he feared the more.

19:9. And he entered into the hall again; and he said to Jesus: Whence
art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.

19:10. Pilate therefore saith to him: Speakest thou not to me? Knowest
thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and I have power to release
thee?

19:11. Jesus answered: Thou shouldst not have any power against me,
unless it were given thee from above. Therefore, he that hath delivered
me to thee hath the greater sin.

19:12. And from henceforth Pilate sought to release him. But the Jews
cried out, saying: If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar’s
friend. For whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.

19:13. Now when Pilate had heard these words, he brought Jesus forth
and sat down in the judgment seat, in the place that is called
Lithostrotos, and in Hebrew Gabbatha.

19:14. And it was the parasceve of the pasch, about the sixth hour: and
he saith to the Jews: Behold your king.

The parasceve of the pasch.... That is, the day before the paschal
sabbath. The eve of every sabbath was called the parasceve, or day of
preparation. But this was the eve of a high sabbath, viz., that which
fell in the paschal week.

19:15. But they cried out: Away with him: Away with him: Crucify him.
Pilate saith to them: shall I crucify your king? The chief priests
answered: We have no king but Caesar.

19:16. Then therefore he delivered him to them to be crucified. And
they took Jesus and led him forth.

19:17. And bearing his own cross, he went forth to the place which is
called Calvary, but in Hebrew Golgotha.

19:18. Where they crucified him, and with him two others, one on each
side, and Jesus in the midst.

19:19. And Pilate wrote a title also: and he put it upon the cross. And
the writing was: JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

19:20. This title therefore many of the Jews did read: because the
place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city. And it was
written in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin.

19:21. Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate: Write not:
The King of the Jews. But that he said: I am the King of the Jews.

19:22. Pilate answered: What I have written, I have written.

19:23. The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified him, took his
garments, (and they made four parts, to every soldier a part) and also
his coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.

19:24. They said then one to another: Let us not cut it but let us cast
lots for it, whose it shall be; that the scripture might be fulfilled,
saying: They have parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture
they have cast lots. And the soldiers indeed did these things.

19:25. Now there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother and his
mother’s sister, Mary of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen.

19:26. When Jesus therefore had seen his mother and the disciple
standing whom he loved, he saith to his mother: Woman, behold thy son.

19:27. After that, he saith to the disciple: Behold thy mother. And
from that hour, the disciple took her to his own.

19:28. Afterwards, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
that the scripture might be fulfilled, said: I thirst.

19:29. Now there was a vessel set there, full of vinegar. And they,
putting a sponge full of vinegar about hyssop, put it to his mouth.

19:30. Jesus therefore, when he had taken the vinegar, said: It is
consummated. And bowing his head, he gave up the ghost.

19:31. Then the Jews (because it was the parasceve), that the bodies
might not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day (for that was a
great sabbath day), besought Pilate that their legs might be broken:
and that they might be taken away.

19:32. The soldiers therefore came: and they broke the legs of the
first, and of the other that was crucified with him.

19:33. But after they were come to Jesus, when they saw that he was
already dead, they did not break his legs.

19:34. But one of the soldiers with a spear opened his side: and
immediately there came out blood and water.

19:35. And he that saw it hath given testimony: and his testimony is
true. And he knoweth that he saith true: that you also may believe.

19:36. For these things were done that the scripture might be
fulfilled: You shall not break a bone of him.

19:37. And again another scripture saith: They shall look on him whom
they pierced.

19:38. And after these things, Joseph of Arimathea (because he was a
disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews), besought Pilate
that he might take away the body of Jesus. And Pilate gave leave. He
came therefore and took away the body of Jesus.

19:39. And Nicodemus also came (he who at the first came to Jesus by
night), bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
weight.

19:40. They took therefore the body of Jesus and bound it in linen
cloths, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.

19:41. Now there was in the place where he was crucified a garden: and
in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein no man yet had been laid.

19:42. There, therefore, because of the parasceve of the Jews, they
laid Jesus: because the sepulchre was nigh at hand.


John Chapter 20

Christ’s resurrection and manifestation to his disciples.

20:1. And on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalen cometh early,
when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre: and she saw the stone taken
away from the sepulchre.

20:2. She ran therefore and cometh to Simon Peter and to the other
disciple whom Jesus loved and saith to them: They have taken away the
Lord out of the sepulchre: and we know not where they have laid him.

20:3. Peter therefore went out, and that other disciple: and they came
to the sepulchre.

20:4. And they both ran together: and that other disciple did outrun
Peter and came first to the sepulchre.

20:5. And when he stooped down, he saw the linen cloths lying: but yet
he went not in.

20:6. Then cometh Simon Peter, following him, and went into the
sepulchre: and saw the linen cloths lying,

20:7. And the napkin that had been about his head, not lying with the
linen cloths, but apart, wrapped up into one place.

20:8. Then that other disciple also went in, who came first to the
sepulchre: and he saw and believed.

20:9. For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again
from the dead.

20:10. The disciples therefore departed again to their home.

20:11. But Mary stood at the sepulchre without, weeping. Now as she was
weeping, she stooped down and looked into the sepulchre,

20:12. And she saw two angels in white, sitting, one at the head, and
one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had been laid.

20:13. They say to her: Woman, why weepest thou? She saith to them:
Because they have taken away my Lord: and I know not where they have
laid him.

20:14. When she had thus said, she turned herself back and saw Jesus
standing: and she knew not that it was Jesus.

20:15. Jesus saith to her: Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou?
She, thinking that it was the gardener, saith to him: Sir, if thou hast
taken him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him: and I will take him
away.

20:16. Jesus saith to her: Mary. She turning, saith to him: Rabboni
(which is to say, Master).

20:17. Jesus saith to her: Do not touch me: for I am not yet ascended
to my Father. But go to my brethren and say to them: I ascend to my
Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God.

20:18. Mary Magdalen cometh and telleth the disciples: I have seen the
Lord; and these things he said to me.

20:19. Now when it was late the same day, the first of the week, and
the doors were shut, where the disciples were gathered together, for
fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst and said to them:
Peace be to you.

The doors were shut.... The same power which could bring Christ’s whole
body, entire in all its dimensions, through the doors, can without the
least question make the same body really present in the sacrament;
though both the one and the other be above our comprehension.

20:20. And when he had said this, he shewed them his hands and his
side. The disciples therefore were glad, when they saw the Lord.

20:21. He said therefore to them again: Peace be to you. As the Father
hath sent me, I also send you.

20:22. When he had said this, he breathed on them; and he said to them:
Receive ye the Holy Ghost.

20:23. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them: and whose
sins you shall retain, they are retained.

Whose sins, etc.... See here the commission, stamped by the broad seal
of heaven, by virtue of which the pastors of Christ’s church absolve
repenting sinners upon their confession.

20:24. Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called Didymus, was not
with them when Jesus came.

20:25. The other disciples therefore said to him: We have seen the
Lord. But he said to them: Except I shall see in his hands the print of
the nails and put my finger into the place of the nails and put my hand
into his side, I will not believe.

20:26. And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and
Thomas with them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the
midst and said: Peace be to you.

20:27. Then he said to Thomas: Put in thy finger hither and see my
hands. And bring hither thy hand and put it into my side. And be not
faithless, but believing.

20:28. Thomas answered and said to him: My Lord and my God.

20:29. Jesus saith to him: Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast
believed: blessed are they that have not seen and have believed.

20:30. Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his disciples,
which are not written in this book.

20:31. But these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God: and that believing, you may have life in his
name.


John Chapter 21

Christ manifests himself to his disciples by the sea side and gives
Peter the charge of his sheep.

21:1. After this, Jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at the
sea of Tiberias. And he shewed himself after this manner.

21:2. There were together: Simon Peter and Thomas, who is called
Didymus, and Nathanael, who was of Cana of Galilee, and the sons of
Zebedee and two others of his disciples.

21:3. Simon Peter saith to them: I go a fishing. They say to him: We
also come with thee. And they went forth and entered into the ship: and
that night they caught nothing.

21:4. But when the morning was come, Jesus stood on the shore: yet the
disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

21:5. Jesus therefore said to them: Children, have you any meat? They
answered him: No.

21:6. He saith to them: Cast the net on the right side of the ship; and
you shall find. They cast therefore: and now they were not able to draw
it, for the multitude of fishes.

21:7. That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter: It is the
Lord. Simon Peter, when he heard that it was the Lord, girt his coat
about him (for he was naked) and cast himself into the sea.

21:8. But the other disciples came in the ship (for they were not far
from the land, but as it were two hundred cubits) dragging the net with
fishes.

21:9. As soon then as they came to land they saw hot coals lying, and a
fish laid thereon, and bread.

21:10. Jesus saith to them: Bring hither of the fishes which you have
now caught.

21:11. Simon Peter went up and drew the net to land, full of great
fishes, one hundred and fifty-three. And although there were so many,
the net was not broken.

21:12. Jesus saith to them: Come and dine. And none of them who were at
meat, durst ask him: Who art thou? Knowing that it was the Lord.

21:13. And Jesus cometh and taketh bread and giveth them: and fish in
like manner.

21:14. This is now the third time that Jesus was manifested to his
disciples, after he was risen from the dead.

21:15. When therefore they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter:
Simon, son of John, lovest thou me more than these? He saith to him:
Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to him: Feed my
lambs.

21:16. He saith to him again: Simon, son of John, lovest thou me? He
saith to him: yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to
him: Feed my lambs.

21:17. He said to him the third time: Simon, son of John, lovest thou
me? Peter was grieved because he had said to him the third time: Lovest
thou me? And he said to him: Lord, thou knowest all things: thou
knowest that I love thee. He said to him: Feed my sheep.

Feed my sheep.... Our Lord had promised the spiritual supremacy to St.
Peter; St. Matt. 16. 19; and here he fulfils that promise, by charging
him with the superintendency of all his sheep, without exception; and
consequently of his whole flock, that is, of his own church.

21:18. Amen, amen, I say to thee, When thou wast younger, thou didst
gird thyself and didst walk where thou wouldst. But when thou shalt be
old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee
and lead thee whither thou wouldst not.

21:19. And this he said, signifying by what death he should glorify
God. And when he had said this, he saith to him: Follow me.

21:20. Peter turning about, saw that disciple whom Jesus loved
following, who also leaned on his breast at supper and said: Lord, who
is he that shall betray thee?

21:21. Him therefore when Peter had seen, he saith to Jesus: Lord, and
what shall this man do?

21:22. Jesus saith to him: So I will have him to remain till I come,
what is it to thee? Follow thou me.

21:23. This saying therefore went abroad among the brethren, that that
disciple should not die. And Jesus did not say to him: He should not
die; but: So I will have him to remain till I come, what is it to thee?

21:24. This is that disciple who giveth testimony of these things and
hath written these things: and we know that his testimony is true.

21:25. But there are also many other things which Jesus did which, if
they were written every one, the world itself. I think, would not be
able to contain the books that should be written.




