THE SECOND BOOK OF MACHABEES


This second book of MACHABEES is not a continuation of the history
contained in the first: nor does is come down so low as the first does:
but relates many of the same facts more at large, and adds other
remarkable particulars, omitted in the first book, relating to the
state of the Jews, as well before as under the persecution of
ANTIOCHUS. The author, who is not the same with that of the first book,
has given (as we learn from chap. 2.20, etc.) a short abstract of what
JASON of Cyrene had written in the five volumes, concerning JUDAS and
his brethren. He wrote in Greek, and begins with two letters, sent by
the Jews of Jerusalem to their brethren in Egypt.


2 Machabees Chapter 1

Letters of the Jews of Jerusalem to them that were in Egypt. They give
thanks for their delivery from Antiochus: and exhort their brethren to
keep the feast of the dedication of the altar, and of the miraculous
fire.

1:1. To the brethren, the Jews that are throughout Egypt; the brethren,
the Jews that are in Jerusalem, and in the land of Judea, send health
and good peace.

1:2. May God be gracious to you, and remember his covenant that he made
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, his faithful servants:

1:3. And give you all a heart to worship him, and to do his will with a
great heart, and a willing mind.

1:4. May he open your heart in his law, and in his commandments, and
send you peace.

1:5. May he hear your prayers, and be reconciled unto you, and never
forsake you in the evil time.

1:6. And now here we are praying for you.

1:7. When Demetrius reigned, in the year one hundred and sixty-nine, we
Jews wrote to you in the trouble and violence that came upon us in
those years, after Jason withdrew himself from the holy land, and from
the kingdom.

1:8. They burnt the gate, and shed innocent blood: then we prayed to
the Lord, and were heard, and we offered sacrifices, and fine flour,
and lighted the lamps, and set forth the loaves.

1:9. And now celebrate ye the days of Scenopegia in the month of
Casleu.

Scenopegia.... Viz., the Encenia, or feast of the dedication of the
altar, called here Scenopegia, or feast of tabernacles, from being
celebrated with the like solemnity.

1:10. In the year one hundred and eighty-eight, the people that is at
Jerusalem, and in Judea, and the senate, and Judas, to Aristobolus, the
preceptor of king Ptolemee, who is of the stock of the anointed
priests, and to the Jews that are in Egypt, health and welfare.

1:11. Having been delivered by God out of great dangers, we give him
great thanks, forasmuch as we have been in war with such a king.

Such a king.... Viz., Antiochus Sidetes, who began to make war upon the
Jews, whilst Simon was yet alive. 1 Mac. 15.39. And afterwards besieged
Jerusalem under John Hircanus. So that the Judas here mentioned, ver.
10, is not Judas Machabeus, who was dead long before the year 188 of
the kingdom of the Greeks, for he died in the year 146 of that epoch,
(see above 1 Mac. chap. 2., ver. 70, also the note on chap. 1, ver. 2,)
but either Judas the eldest son of John Hircanus, or Judas the Essene,
renowned for the gift of prophecy, who flourished about that time.

1:12. For he made numbers of men swarm out of Persia, that have fought
against us, and the holy city.

1:13. For when the leader himself was in Persia, and with him a very
great army, he fell in the temple of Nanea, being deceived by the
counsel of the priests of Nanea.

Nanea.... A Persian goddess, which some have taken for Diana, others
for Venus.

1:14. For Antiochus, with his friends, came to the place as though he
would marry her, and that he might receive great sums of money under
the title of a dowry.

1:15. And when the priests of Nanea had set it forth, and he with a
small company had entered into the compass of the temple, they shut the
temple,

1:16. When Antiochus was come in: and opening a secret entrance of the
temple, they cast stones and slew the leader, and them that were with
him, and hewed them in pieces; and cutting off their heads, they threw
them forth.

1:17. Blessed be God in all things, who hath delivered up the wicked.

1:18. Therefore, whereas we purpose to keep the purification of the
temple on the five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu, we thought
it necessary to signify it to you: that you also may keep the day of
Scenopegia, and the day of the fire, that was given when Nehemias
offered sacrifice, after the temple and the altar was built.

1:19. For when our fathers were led into Persia, the priests that then
were worshippers of God, took privately the fire from the altar, and
hid it in a valley where there was a deep pit without water, and there
they kept it safe, so that the place was unknown to all men.

Persia.... Babylonia, called here Persia, from being afterwards a part
of the Persian empire.

1:20. But when many years had passed, and it pleased God that Nehemias
should be sent by the king of Persia, he sent some of the posterity of
those priests that had hid it, to seek for the fire: and as they told
us, they found no fire, but thick water.

1:21. Then he bade them draw it up, and bring it to him: and the
priest, Nehemias, commanded the sacrifices that were laid on, to be
sprinkled with the same water, both the wood, and the things that were
laid upon it.

1:22. And when this was done, and the time came that the sun shone out,
which before was in a cloud, there was a great fire kindled, so that
all wondered.

1:23. And all the priests made prayer, while the sacrifice was
consuming, Jonathan beginning, and the rest answering.

1:24. And the prayer of Nehemias was after this manner: O Lord God,
Creator of all things, dreadful and strong, just and merciful, who
alone art the good king,

1:25. Who alone art gracious, who alone art just, and almighty, and
eternal, who deliverest Israel from all evil, who didst choose the
fathers, and didst sanctify them:

1:26. Receive the sacrifice for all thy people Israel, and preserve thy
own portion, and sanctify it.

1:27. Gather together our scattered people, deliver them that are
slaves to the Gentiles, and look upon them that are despised and
abhorred: that the Gentiles may know that thou art our God.

1:28. Punish them that oppress us, and that treat us injuriously with
pride.

1:29. Establish thy people in thy holy place, as Moses hath spoken.

1:30. And the priests sung hymns till the sacrifice was consumed.

1:31. And when the sacrifice was consumed, Nehemias commanded the water
that was left to be poured out upon the great stones.

1:32. Which being done, there was kindled a flame from them: but it was
consumed by the light that shined from the altar.

1:33. And when this matter became public, it was told to the king of
Persia, that in the place where the priests that were led away, had hid
the fire, there appeared water, with which Nehemias and they that were
with him had purified the sacrifices.

1:34. And the king considering, and diligently examining the matter,
made a temple for it, that he might prove what had happened.

A temple.... That is, an enclosure, or a wall round about the place
where the fire was hid, to separate it from profane uses, to the end
that it might be respected as a holy place.

1:35. And when he had proved it, he gave the priests many goods, and
divers presents, and he took and distributed them to them with his own
hand.

1:36. And Nehemias called this place Nephthar, which is interpreted
purification. But many call it Nephi.


2 Machabees Chapter 2

A continuation of the second letter. Of Jeremias’ hiding the ark at the
time of the captivity. The author’s preface.

2:1.Now it is found in the descriptions of Jeremias, the prophet, that
he commanded them that went into captivity, to take the fire, as it
hath been signified, and how he gave charge to them that were carried
away into captivity.

The descriptions.... That is, the records or memoirs of Jeremias, a
work that is now lost.

2:2. And how he gave them the law, that they should not forget the
commandments of the Lord, and that they should not err in their minds,
seeing the idols of gold, and silver, and the ornaments of them.

2:3. And with other such like speeches, he exhorted them that they
would not remove the law from their heart.

2:4. It was also contained in the same writing, how the prophet, being
warned by God, commanded that the tabernacle and the ark should
accompany him, till he came forth to the mountain where Moses went up,
and saw the inheritance of God.

2:5. And when Jeremias came thither he found a hollow cave: and he
carried in thither the tabernacle, and the ark, and the altar of
incense, and so stopped the door.

2:6. Then some of them that followed him, came up to mark the place:
but they could not find it.

2:7. And when Jeremias perceived it, he blamed them, saying: The place
shall be unknown, till God gather together the congregation of the
people, and receive them to mercy.

2:8. And then the Lord will shew these things, and the majesty of the
Lord shall appear, and there shall be a cloud as it was also shewed to
Moses, and he shewed it when Solomon prayed that the place might be
sanctified to the great God.

2:9. For he treated wisdom in a magnificent manner: and like a wise
man, he offered the sacrifice of the dedication, and of the finishing
of the temple.

2:10. And as Moses prayed to the Lord, and fire came down from heaven,
and consumed the holocaust: so Solomon also prayed, and fire came down
from heaven and consumed the holocaust.

2:11. And Moses said: Because the sin offering was not eaten, it was
consumed.

2:12. So Solomon also celebrated the dedication eight days.

2:13. And these same things were set down in the memoirs, and
commentaries of Nehemias: and how he made a library, and gathered
together out of the countries, the books both of the prophets, and of
David, and the epistles of the kings, and concerning the holy gifts.

2:14. And in like manner Judas also gathered together all such things
as were lost by the war we had, and they are in our possession.

2:15. Wherefore, if you want these things, send some that may fetch
them to you.

2:16. As we are then about to celebrate the purification, we have
written unto you: and you shall do well, if you keep the same days.

The purification.... That is, the feast of the purifying or cleansing
of the temple.

2:17. And we hope that God, who hath delivered his people, and hath
rendered to all the inheritance, and the kingdom, and the priesthood,
and the sanctuary,

2:18. As he promised in the law, will shortly have mercy upon us, and
will gather us together from every land under heaven into the holy
place.

2:19. For he hath delivered us out of great perils, and hath cleansed
the place.

2:20. Now as concerning Judas Machabeus, and his brethren, and the
purification of the great temple, and the dedication of the altar:

2:21. As also the wars against Antiochus, the Illustrious, and his son,
Eupator:

2:22. And the manifestations that came from heaven to them, that
behaved themselves manfully on the behalf of the Jews, so that, being
but a few they made themselves masters of the whole country, and put to
flight the barbarous multitude:

2:23. And recovered again the most renowned temple in all the world,
and delivered the city, and restored the laws that were abolished, the
Lord with all clemency shewing mercy to them.

2:24. And all such things as have been comprised in five books by
Jason, of Cyrene, we have attempted to abridge in one book.

2:25. For considering the multitude of books, and the difficulty that
they find that desire to undertake the narrations of histories, because
of the multitude of the matter,

2:26. We have taken care for those indeed that are willing to read,
that it might be a pleasure of mind: and for the studious, that they
may more easily commit to memory: and that all that read might receive
profit.

2:27. And as to ourselves indeed, in undertaking this work of
abridging, we have taken in hand no easy task; yea, rather a business
full of watching and sweat.

No easy task, etc.... The spirit of God, that assists the sacred
penmen, does not exempt them from labour in seeking out the matter
which they are to treat of, and the order and manner in which they are
to deliver it. So St. Luke writ the gospel having diligently attained
to all things. Luke 1. ver. 3.

2:28. But as they that prepare a feast, and seek to satisfy the will of
others: for the sake of many, we willingly undergo the labour.

2:29. Leaving to the authors the exact handling of every particular,
and as for ourselves, according to the plan proposed, studying to be
brief.

2:30. For as the master builder of a new house must have care of the
whole building: but he that taketh care to paint it, must seek out fit
things for the adorning of it: so must it be judged of us.

2:31. For to collect all that is to be known, to put the discourse in
order, and curiously to discuss every particular point, is the duty of
the author of a history:

2:32. But to pursue brevity of speech, and to avoid nice declarations
of things, is to be granted to him that maketh an abridgment.

2:33. Here then we will begin the narration: let this be enough by way
of a preface: for it is a foolish thing to make a long prologue, and to
be short in the story itself.


2 Machabees Chapter 3

Heliodorus is sent by king Seleucus to take away the treasures
deposited in the temple. He is struck by God, and healed by the prayers
of the high priest.

3:1. Therefore, when the holy city was inhabited with all peace, and
the laws as yet were very well kept, because of the godliness of Onias,
the high priest and the hatred his soul had of evil,

3:2. It came to pass that even the kings themselves and the princes
esteemed the place worthy of the highest honour, and glorified the
temple with very great gifts:

3:3. So that Seleucus, king of Asia, allowed out of his revenues all
the charges belonging to the ministry of the sacrifices.

Seleucus.... Son of Antiochus the Great, and elder brother of Antiochus
Epiphanes.

3:4. But one Simon, of the tribe of Benjamin, who was appointed
overseer of the temple, strove in opposition to the high priest, to
bring about some unjust thing in the city.

3:5. And when he could not overcome Onias, he went to Apollonius, the
son of Tharseas, who at that time was governor of Celesyria, and
Phenicia:

3:6. And told him, that the treasury in Jerusalem was full of immense
sums of money, and the common store was infinite, which did not belong
to the account of the sacrifices: and that it was possible to bring all
into the king’s hands.

3:7. Now when Apollonius had given the king notice concerning the money
that he was told of, he called for Heliodorus, who had the charge over
his affairs, and sent him with commission to bring him the foresaid
money.

3:8. So Heliodorus forthwith began his journey, under a colour of
visiting the cities of Celesyria and Phenicia, but indeed to fulfil the
king’s purpose.

3:9. And when he was come to Jerusalem, and had been courteously
received in the city by the high priest, he told him what information
had been given concerning the money: and declared the cause for which
he was come: and asked if these things were so indeed.

3:10. Then the high priest told him that these were sums deposited, and
provisions for the subsistence of the widows and the fatherless:

3:11. And that some part of that which wicked Simon had given
intelligence of belonged to Hircanus, son of Tobias, a man of great
dignity; and that the whole was four hundred talents of silver, and two
hundred of gold.

3:12. But that to deceive them who had trusted to the place and temple
which is honoured throughout the whole world, for the reverence and
holiness of it, was a thing which could not by any means be done.

3:13. But he, by reason of the orders he had received from the king,
said, that by all means the money must be carried to the king.

3:14. So on the day he had appointed, Heliodorus entered in to order
this matter. But there was no small terror throughout the whole city.

3:15. And the priests prostrated themselves before the altar in their
priests’ vestments, and called upon him from heaven, who made the law
concerning things given to be kept, that he would preserve them safe,
for them that had deposited them.

3:16. Now whosoever saw the countenance of the high priest, was wounded
in heart: for his face, and the changing of his colour, declared the
inward sorrow of his mind.

3:17. For the man was so compassed with sadness and horror of the body,
that it was manifest to them that beheld him, what sorrow he had in his
heart.

3:18. Others also came flocking together out of their houses, praying
and making public supplication, because the place was like to come into
contempt.

3:19. And the women, girded with haircloth about their breasts, came
together in the streets. And the virgins also that were shut up, came
forth, some to Onias, and some to the walls, and others looked out of
the windows.

3:20. And all holding up their hands towards heaven made supplication.

3:21. For the expectation of the mixed multitude, and of the high
priest, who was in an agony, would have moved any one to pity.

3:22. And these indeed called upon almighty God, to preserve the things
that had been committed to them safe and sure for those that had
committed them.

3:23. But Heliodorus executed that which he had resolved on, himself
being present in the same place with his guard about the treasury.

3:24. But the spirit of the Almighty God gave a great evidence of his
presence, so that all that had presumed to obey him, falling down by
the power of God, were struck with fainting and dread.

3:25. For there appeared to them a horse, with a terrible rider upon
him, adorned with a very rich covering: and he ran fiercely and struck
Heliodorus with his fore feet, and he that sat upon him seemed to have
armour of gold.

3:26. Moreover there appeared two other young men, beautiful and
strong, bright and glorious, and in comely apparel: who stood by him,
on either side, and scourged him without ceasing with many stripes.

3:27. And Heliodorus suddenly fell to the ground, and they took him up,
covered with great darkness, and having put him into a litter, they
carried him out.

3:28. So he that came with many servants, and all his guard, into the
aforesaid treasury, was carried out, no one being able to help him, the
manifest power of God being known.

3:29. And he indeed, by the power of God, lay speechless, and without
all hope of recovery.

3:30. But they praised the Lord, because he had glorified his place:
and the temple, that a little before was full of fear and trouble, when
the Almighty Lord appeared, was filled with joy and gladness.

3:31. Then some of the friends of Heliodorus forthwith begged of Onias,
that he would call upon the Most High to grant him his life, who was
ready to give up the ghost.

3:32. So the high priest, considering that the king might perhaps
suspect that some mischief had been done to Heliodorus by the Jews,
offered a sacrifice of health for the recovery of the man.

3:33. And when the high priest was praying, the same young men in the
same clothing stood by Heliodorus, and said to him: Give thanks to
Onias the priest: because for his sake the Lord hath granted thee life.

3:34. And thou having been scourged by God, declare unto all men the
great works and the power of God. And having spoken thus, they appeared
no more.

3:35. So Heliodorus, after he had offered a sacrifice to God, and made
great vows to him, that had granted him life, and given thanks to
Onias, taking his troops with him, returned to the king.

3:36. And he testified to all men the works of the great God, which he
had seen with his own eyes.

3:37. And when the king asked Heliodorus, who might be a fit man to be
sent yet once more to Jerusalem, he said:

3:38. If thou hast any enemy, or traitor to thy kingdom, send him
thither, and thou shalt receive him again scourged, if so be he escape:
for there is undoubtedly in that place a certain power of God.

3:39. For he that hath his dwelling in the heavens, is the visitor and
protector of that place, and he striketh and destroyeth them that come
to do evil to it.

3:40. And the things concerning Heliodorus, and the keeping of the
treasury, fell out in this manner.


2 Machabees Chapter 4

Onias has recourse to the king. The ambition and wickedness of Jason
and Menelaus. Onias is treacherously murdered.

4:1. But Simon, of whom we spoke before, who was the betrayer of the
money, and of his country, spoke ill of Onias, as though he had incited
Heliodorus to do these things, and had been the promoter of evils:

4:2. And he presumed to call him a traitor to the kingdom, who provided
for the city, and defended his nation, and was zealous for the law of
God.

4:3. But when the enmities proceeded so far, that murders also were
committed by some of Simon’s friends:

4:4. Onias, considering the danger of this contention, and that
Apollonius, who was the governor of Celesyria, and Phenicia, was
outrageous, which increased the malice of Simon, went to the king,

4:5. Not to be an accuser of his countrymen, but with a view to the
common good of all the people.

4:6. For he saw that, except the king took care, it was impossible that
matters should be settled in peace, or that Simon would cease from his
folly.

4:7. But after the death of Seleucus, when Antiochus, who was called
the Illustrious, had taken possession of the kingdom, Jason, the
brother of Onias, ambitiously sought the high priesthood:

4:8. And went to the king, promising him three hundred and sixty
talents of silver, and out of other revenues fourscore talents.

4:9. Besides this he promised also a hundred and fifty more, if he
might have license to set him up a place for exercise, and a place for
youth, and to entitle them that were at Jerusalem, Antiochians.

4:10. Which when the king had granted, and he had gotten the rule into
his hands, forthwith he began to bring over his countrymen to the
fashion of the heathens.

4:11. And abolishing those things, which had been decreed of special
favour by the kings in behalf of the Jews, by the means of John, the
father of that Eupolemus, who went ambassador to Rome to make amity and
alliance, he disannulled the lawful ordinances of the citizens, and
brought in fashions that were perverse.

4:12. For he had the boldness to set up, under the very castle, a place
of exercise, and to put all the choicest youths in brothel houses.

4:13. Now this was not the beginning, but an increase, and progress of
heathenish and foreign manners, through the abominable and unheard of
wickedness of Jason, that impious wretch, and no priest.

4:14. Insomuch that the priests were not now occupied about the offices
of the altar, but despising the temple and neglecting the sacrifices,
hastened to be partakers of the games, and of the unlawful allowance
thereof, and of the exercise of the discus.

4:15. And setting nought by the honours of their fathers, they esteemed
the Grecian glories for the best:

4:16. For the sake of which they incurred a dangerous contention, and
followed earnestly their ordinances, and in all things they coveted to
be like them, who were their enemies and murderers.

4:17. For acting wickedly against the laws of God doth not pass
unpunished: but this the time following will declare.

4:18. Now when the game that was used every fifth year was kept at
Tyre, the king being present,

4:19. The wicked Jason sent from Jerusalem sinful men, to carry three
hundred didrachmas of silver for the sacrifice of Hercules; but the
bearers thereof desired it might not be bestowed on the sacrifices,
because it was not necessary, but might be deputed for other charges.

4:20. So the money was appointed by him that sent it to the sacrifice
of Hercules: but because of them that carried it was employed for the
making of galleys.

4:21. Now when Apollonius, the son of Mnestheus was sent into Egypt to
treat with the nobles of king Philometor, and Antiochus understood that
he was wholly excluded from the affairs of the kingdom, consulting his
own interest, he departed thence and came to Joppe, and from thence to
Jerusalem.

4:22. Where he was received in a magnificent manner by Jason, and the
city, and came in with torch lights, and with praises, and from thence
he returned with his army into Phenicia.

4:23. Three years afterwards Jason sent Menelaus, brother of the
aforesaid Simon, to carry money to the king, and to bring answers from
him concerning certain necessary affairs.

4:24. But he being recommended to the king, when he had magnified the
appearance of his power, got the high priesthood for himself, by
offering more than Jason by three hundred talents of silver.

4:25. So having received the king’s mandate, he returned, bringing
nothing worthy of the high priesthood: but having the mind of a cruel
tyrant, and the rage of a savage beast.

4:26. Then Jason, who had undermined his own brother, being himself
undermined, was driven out a fugitive into the country of the
Ammonites.

4:27. So Menelaus got the principality: but as for the money he had
promised to the king, he took no care, when Sostratus, the governor of
the castle, called for it.

4:28. For to him appertained the gathering of the taxes: wherefore they
were both called before the king.

4:29. And Menelaus was removed from the priesthood, Lysimachus, his
brother, succeeding: and Sostratus was made governor of the Cyprians.

4:30. When these things were in doing, it fell out that they of
Tharsus, and Mallos, raised a sedition, because they were given for a
gift to Antiochus, the king’s concubine.

4:31. The king, therefore, went in all haste to appease them, leaving
Andronicus, one of his nobles, for his deputy.

4:32. Then Menelaus supposing that he had found a convenient time,
having stolen certain vessels of gold out of the temple, gave them to
Andronicus, and others he had sold at Tyre, and in the neighbouring
cities:

4:33. Which when Onias understood most certainly, he reproved him,
keeping himself in a safe place at Antioch, beside Daphne.

4:34. Whereupon Menelaus coming to Andronicus, desired him to kill
Onias. And he went to Onias, and gave him his right hand with an oath,
and (though he were suspected by him) persuaded him to come forth out
of the sanctuary, and immediately slew him, without any regard to
justice.

4:35. For which cause not only the Jews, but also the other nations,
conceived indignation, and were much grieved for the unjust murder of
so great a man.

4:36. And when the king was come back from the places of Cilicia, the
Jews that were at Antioch, and also the Greeks, went to him:
complaining of the unjust murder of Onias.

4:37. Antiochus, therefore, was grieved in his mind for Onias, and
being moved to pity, shed tears, remembering the sobriety and modesty
of the deceased.

4:38. And being inflamed to anger, he commanded Andronicus to be
stripped of his purple, and to be led about through all the city: and
that in the same place wherein he had committed the impiety against
Onias, the sacrilegious wretch should be put to death, the Lord
repaying him his deserved punishment.

4:39. Now when many sacrileges had been committed by Lysimachus in the
temple, by the counsel of Menelaus, and the rumour of it was spread
abroad, the multitude gathered themselves together against Lysimachus,
a great quantity of gold being already carried away.

4:40. Wherefore the multitude making an insurrection, and their minds
being filled with anger, Lysimachus armed about three thousand men, and
began to use violence, one Tyrannus being captain, a man far gone both
in age and in madness.

4:41. But when they perceived the attempt of Lysimachus, some caught up
stones, some strong clubs, and some threw ashes upon Lysimachus.

4:42. And many of them were wounded, and some struck down to the
ground, but all were put to flight: and as for the sacrilegious fellow
himself, they slew him beside the treasury.

4:43. Now concerning these matters, an accusation was laid against
Menelaus.

4:44. And when the king was come to Tyre, three men were sent from the
ancients to plead the cause before him.

4:45. But Menelaus being convicted, promised Ptolemee to give him much
money to persuade the king to favour him.

Ptolemee.... The son of Dorymenus, a favourite of the king.

4:46. So Ptolemee went to the king in a certain court where he was, as
it were to cool himself, and brought him to be of another mind:

4:47. So Menelaus, who was guilty of all the evil, was acquitted by him
of the accusations: and those poor men, who, if they had pleaded their
cause even before Scythians, should have been judged innocent, were
condemned to death.

4:48. Thus they that prosecuted the cause for the city, and for the
people, and the sacred vessels, did soon suffer unjust punishment.

4:49. Wherefore even the Tyrians, being moved with indignation, were
very liberal towards their burial.

4:50. And so through the covetousness of them that were in power,
Menelaus continued in authority, increasing in malice to the betraying
of the citizens.


2 Machabees Chapter 5

Wonderful signs are seen in the air. Jason’s wickedness and end.
Antiochus takes Jerusalem, and plunders the temple.

5:1. At the same time Antiochus prepared for a second journey into
Egypt.

5:2. And it came to pass, that through the whole city of Jerusalem, for
the space of forty days, there were seen horsemen running in the air,
in gilded raiment, and armed with spears, like bands of soldiers.

5:3. And horses set in order by ranks, running one against another,
with the shakings of shields, and a multitude of men in helmets, with
drawn swords, and casting of darts, and glittering of golden armour,
and of harnesses of all sorts.

5:4. Wherefore all men prayed that these prodigies might turn to good.

5:5. Now when there was gone forth a false rumour as though Antiochus
had been dead, Jason taking with him no fewer than a thousand men,
suddenly assaulted the city: and though the citizens ran together to
the wall, the city at length was taken, and Menelaus fled into the
castle.

5:6. But Jason slew his countrymen without mercy, not considering that
prosperity against one’s own kindred is a very great evil, thinking
they had been enemies, and not citizens, whom he conquered.

5:7. Yet he did not get the principality, but received confusion at the
end, for the reward of his treachery, and fled again into the country
of the Ammonites.

5:8. At the last, having been shut up by Aretas, the king of the
Arabians, in order for his destruction, flying from city to city, hated
by all men, as a forsaker of the laws and execrable, as an enemy of his
country and countrymen, he was thrust out into Egypt:

5:9. And he that had driven many out of their country perished in a
strange land, going to Lacedemon, as if for kindred sake he should have
refuge there:

5:10. But he that had cast out many unburied, was himself cast forth
both unlamented and unburied, neither having foreign burial, nor being
partaker of the sepulchre of his fathers.

5:11. Now when these things were done, the king suspected that the Jews
would forsake the alliance: whereupon departing out of Egypt with a
furious mind, he took the city by force of arms,

5:12. And commanded the soldiers to kill, and not to spare any that
came in their way, and to go up into the houses to slay.

5:13. Thus there was a slaughter of young and old, destruction of women
and children, and killing of virgins and infants.

5:14. And there were slain in the space of three whole days fourscore
thousand, forty thousand were made prisoners, and as many sold.

5:15. But this was not enough, he presumed also to enter into the
temple, the most holy in all the world Menelaus, that traitor to the
laws, and to his country, being his guide.

5:16. And taking in his wicked hands the holy vessels, which were given
by other kings and cities, for the ornament and the glory of the place,
he unworthily handled and profaned them.

5:17. Thus Antiochus going astray in mind, did not consider that God
was angry for a while, because of the sins of the inhabitants of the
city: and therefore this contempt had happened to the place:

5:18. Otherwise had they not been involved in many sins, as Heliodorus,
who was sent by king Seleucus to rob the treasury, so this man also, as
soon as he had come, had been forthwith scourged, and put back from his
presumption.

5:19. But God did not choose the people for the place’s sake, but the
place for the people’s sake.

5:20. And, therefore, the place also itself was made partaker of the
evils of the people: but afterwards shall communicate in the good
things thereof, and as it was forsaken in the wrath of Almighty God,
shall be exalted again with great glory, when the great Lord shall be
reconciled.

5:21. So when Antiochus had taken away out of the temple a thousand and
eight hundred talents, he went back in all haste to Antioch, thinking
through pride that he might now make the land navigable, and the sea
passable on foot: such was the haughtiness of his mind.

5:22. He left also governors to afflict the people: at Jerusalem,
Philip, a Phrygian by birth, but in manners more barbarous than he that
set him there:

5:23. And in Gazarim, Andronicus and Menelaus, who bore a more heavy
hand upon the citizens than the rest.

5:24. And whereas he was set against the Jews, he sent that hateful
prince, Apollonius, with an army of two and twenty thousand men,
commanding him to kill all that were of perfect age, and to sell the
women and the younger sort.

5:25. Who, when he was come to Jerusalem, pretending peace, rested till
the holy day of the sabbath: and then the Jews keeping holiday, he
commanded his men to take arms.

5:26. And he slew all that were come forth to see: and running through
the city with armed men, he destroyed a very great multitude.

5:27. But Judas Machabeus, who was the tenth, had withdrawn himself
into a desert place, and there lived amongst wild beasts in the
mountains with his company: and they continued feeding on herbs, that
they might not be partakers of the pollution.

Was the tenth.... That is, he had nine others in his company.


2 Machabees Chapter 6

Antiochus commands the law to be abolished, sets up an idol in the
temple, and persecutes the faithful. The martyrdom of Eleazar.

6:1. But not long after the king sent a certain old man of Antioch, to
compel the Jews to depart from the laws of their fathers and of God:

6:2. And to defile the temple that was in Jerusalem, and to call it the
temple of Jupiter Olympius: and that in Garazim of Jupiter Hospitalis,
according as they were that inhabited the place.

That in Gazarim.... Viz., the temple of the Samaritans. And as they
were originally strangers, the name of Hospitalis (which signifies of
or belonging to strangers) was applicable to the idol set up in their
temple.

6:3. And very bad was this invasion of evils, and grievous to all.

6:4. For the temple was full of the riot and revellings of the
Gentiles: and of men lying with lewd women. And women thrust themselves
of their accord into the holy places, and brought in things that were
not lawful.

6:5. The altar also was filled with unlawful things, which were
forbidden by the laws.

6:6. And neither were the sabbaths kept, nor the solemn days of the
fathers observed, neither did any man plainly profess himself to be a
Jew.

6:7. But they were led by bitter constraint on the king’s birthday to
the sacrifices: and when the feast of Bacchus was kept, they were
compelled to go about crowned with ivy in honour of Bacchus.

6:8. And there went out a decree into the neighbouring cities of the
Gentiles, by the suggestion of the Ptolemeans, that they also should
act in like manner against the Jews, to oblige them to sacrifice:

6:9. And whosoever would not conform themselves to the ways of the
Gentiles, should be put to death: then was misery to be seen.

6:10. For two women were accused to have circumcised their children:
whom, when they had openly led about through the city, with the infants
hanging at their breasts, they threw down headlong from the walls.

6:11. And others that had met together in caves that were near, and
were keeping the sabbath day privately, being discovered by Philip,
were burnt with fire, because they made a conscience to help themselves
with their hands, by reason of the religious observance of the day.

Philip.... The governor of Jerusalem.

6:12. Now I beseech those that shall read this book, that they be not
shocked at these calamities, but that they consider the things that
happened, not as being for the destruction, but for the correction of
our nation.

6:13. For it is a token of great goodness, when sinners are not
suffered to go on in their ways for a long time, but are presently
punished.

6:14. For, not as with other nations, (whom the Lord patiently
expecteth, that when the day of judgment shall come, he may punish them
in the fulness of their sins:)

6:15. Doth he also deal with us, so as to suffer our sins to come to
their height, and then take vengeance on us.

6:16. And therefore he never withdraweth his mercy from us: but though
he chastise his people with adversity he forsaketh them not.

6:17. But let this suffice in a few words for a warning to the readers.
And now we must come to the narration.

6:18. Eleazar one of the chief of the scribes, a man advanced in years,
and of a comely countenance, was pressed to open his mouth to eat
swine’s flesh.

6:19. But he, choosing rather a most glorious death than a hateful
life, went forward voluntarily to the torment.

6:20. And considering in what manner he was to come to it, patiently
bearing, he determined not to do any unlawful things for the love of
life.

6:21. But they that stood by, being moved with wicked pity, for the old
friendship they had with the man, taking him aside, desired that flesh
might be brought which it was lawful for him to eat, that he might make
as if he had eaten, as the king had commanded, of the flesh of the
sacrifice:

Wicked pity.... Their pity was wicked, inasmuch as it suggested that
wicked proposal of saving his life by dissimulation.

6:22. That by so doing he might be delivered from death; and for the
sake of their old friendship with the man, they did him this courtesy.

6:23. But he began to consider the dignity of his age, and his ancient
years, and the inbred honour of his grey head, and his good life and
conversation from a child; and he answered without delay, according to
the ordinances of the holy law made by God, saying, that he would
rather be sent into the other world.

6:24. For it doth not become our age, said he, to dissemble: whereby
many young persons might think that Eleazar, at the age of fourscore
and ten years, was gone over to the life of the heathens:

6:25. And so they, through my dissimulation, and for a little time of a
corruptible life, should be deceived, and hereby I should bring a stain
and a curse upon my old age.

6:26. For though, for the present time, I should be delivered from the
punishments of men, yet should I not escape the hand of the Almighty
neither alive nor dead.

6:27. Wherefore, by departing manfully out of this life, I shall shew
myself worthy of my old age:

6:28. And I shall leave an example of fortitude to young men, if with a
ready mind and constancy I suffer an honourable death, for the most
venerable and most holy laws. And having spoken thus, he was forthwith
carried to execution.

6:29. And they that led him, and had been a little before more mild,
were changed to wrath for the words he had spoken, which they thought
were uttered out of arrogancy.

6:30. But when he was now ready to die with the stripes, he groaned:
and said: O Lord, who hast the holy knowledge, thou knowest manifestly
that whereas I might be delivered from death, I suffer grievous pains
in body: but in soul am well content to suffer these things, because I
fear thee.

6:31. Thus did this man die, leaving not only to young men, but also to
the whole nation, the memory of his death, for an example of virtue and
fortitude.


2 Machabees Chapter 7

The glorious martyrdom of the seven brethren and their mother.

7:1. It came to pass also, that seven brethren, together with their
mother, were apprehended, and compelled by the king to eat swine’s
flesh against the law, for which end they were tormented with whips and
scourges.

7:2. But one of them, who was the eldest, said thus: What wouldst thou
ask, or learn of us? we are ready to die, rather than to transgress the
laws of God, received from our fathers.

7:3. Then the king being angry, commanded fryingpans and brazen
caldrons to be made hot: which forthwith being heated,

7:4. He commanded to cut out the tongue of him that had spoken first:
and the skin of his head being drawn off, to chop off also the
extremities of his hands and feet, the rest of his brethren and his
mother looking on.

7:5. And when he was now maimed in all parts, he commanded him, being
yet alive, to be brought to the fire, and to be fried in the fryingpan:
and while he was suffering therein long torments, the rest, together
with the mother, exhorted one another to die manfully,

7:6. Saying: The Lord God will look upon the truth, and will take
pleasure in us, as Moses declared in the profession of the canticle;
And in his servants he will take pleasure.

7:7. So when the first was dead after this manner, they brought the
next to make him a mocking stock: and when they had pulled off the skin
of his head with the hair, they asked him if he would eat, before he
were punished throughout the whole body in every limb.

7:8. But he answered in his own language, and said: I will not do it.
Wherefore he also, in the next place, received the torments of the
first:

7:9. And when he was at the last gasp, he said thus: Thou indeed, O
most wicked man, destroyest us out of this present life: but the King
of the world will raise us up, who die for his laws, in the
resurrection of eternal life.

7:10. After him the third was made a mocking-stock, and when he was
required, he quickly put forth his tongue, and courageously stretched
out his hands:

7:11. And said with confidence: These I have from heaven, but for the
laws of God I now despise them, because I hope to receive them again
from him.

7:12. So that the king, and they that were with him, wondered at the
young man’s courage, because he esteemed the torments as nothing.

7:13. And after he was thus dead, they tormented the fourth in the like
manner.

7:14. And when he was now ready to die, he spoke thus: It is better,
being put to death by men, to look for hope from God, to be raised up
again by him; for, as to thee, thou shalt have no resurrection unto
life.

7:15. And when they had brought the fifth, they tormented him. But he,
looking upon the king,

7:16. Said: Whereas thou hast power among men though thou art
corruptible, thou dost what thou wilt but think not that our nation is
forsaken by God.

7:17. But stay patiently a while, and thou shalt see his great power,
in what manner he will torment thee and thy seed.

7:18. After him they brought the sixth, and he being ready to die,
spoke thus: Be not deceived without cause: for we suffer these things
for ourselves, having sinned against our God, and things worthy of
admiration are done to us:

7:19. But do not think that thou shalt escape unpunished, for that thou
hast attempted to fight against God.

7:20. Now the mother was to be admired above measure, and worthy to be
remembered by good men, who beheld her seven sons slain in the space of
one day, and bore it with a good courage, for the hope that she had in
God:

7:21. And she bravely exhorted every one of them in her own language,
being filled with wisdom; and joining a man’s heart to a woman’s
thought,

7:22. She said to them: I know not how you were formed in my womb; for
I neither gave you breath, nor soul, nor life, neither did I frame the
limbs of every one of you.

7:23. But the Creator of the world, that formed the nativity of man,
and that found out the origin of all, he will restore to you again, in
his mercy, both breath and life, as now you despise yourselves for the
sake of his laws.

7:24. Now Antiochus, thinking himself despised, and withal despising
the voice of the upbraider, when the youngest was yet alive, did not
only exhort him by words, but also assured him with an oath, that he
would make him a rich and a happy man, and, if he would turn from the
laws of his fathers, would take him for a friend, and furnish him with
things necessary.

7:25. But when the young man was not moved with these things, the king
called the mother, and counselled her to deal with the young man to
save his life.

7:26. And when he had exhorted her with many words she promised that
she would counsel her son.

7:27. So bending herself towards him, mocking the cruel tyrant, she
said in her own language: My son have pity upon me, that bore thee nine
months in my womb, and gave thee suck three years, and nourished thee,
and brought thee up unto this age.

7:28. I beseech thee, my son, look upon heaven and earth, and all that
is in them, and consider that God made them out of nothing, and mankind
also:

7:29. So thou shalt not fear this tormentor, but being made a worthy
partner with thy brethren, receive death, that in that mercy I may
receive thee again with thy brethren.

7:30. While she was yet speaking these words, the young man said: For
whom do you stay? I will not obey the commandment of the king, but the
commandment of the law which was given us by Moses.

7:31. But thou that hast been the author of all mischief against the
Hebrews, shalt not escape the hand of God.

7:32. For we suffer thus for our sins.

7:33. And though the Lord, our God, is angry with us a little while,
for our chastisement and correction, yet he will be reconciled again to
his servants.

7:34. But thou, O wicked, and of all men most flagitious, be not lifted
up without cause with vain hopes, whilst thou art raging against his
servants.

7:35. For thou hast not yet escaped the judgment of the Almighty God,
who beholdeth all things.

7:36. For my brethren having now undergone a short pain, are under the
covenant of eternal life: but thou, by the judgment of God, shalt
receive just punishment for thy pride.

7:37. But I, like my brethren, offer up my life and my body for the
laws of our fathers: calling upon God to be speedily merciful to our
nation, and that thou by torments and stripes mayst confess that he
alone is God.

7:38. But in me, and in my brethren, the wrath of the Almighty, which
hath justly been brought upon all our nation, shall cease.

7:39. Then the king being incensed with anger, raged against him more
cruelly than all the rest, taking it grievously that he was mocked.

7:40. So this man also died undefiled, wholly trusting in the Lord.

7:41. And last of all, after the sons, the mother also was consumed.

7:42. But now there is enough said of the sacrifices and of the
excessive cruelties.


2 Machabees Chapter 8

Judas Machabeus gathering an army gains divers victories.

8:1. But Judas Machabeus, and they that were with him, went privately
into the towns: and calling together their kinsmen and friends, and
taking unto them such as continued in the Jews’ religion, they
assembled six thousand men.

8:2. And they called upon the Lord, that he would look upon his people
that was trodden down by all and would have pity on the temple, that
was defiled by the wicked:

8:3. That he would have pity also upon the city that was destroyed,
that was ready to be made even with the ground, and would hear the
voice of the blood that cried to him:

8:4. That he would remember also the most unjust deaths of innocent
children, and the blasphemies offered to his name, and would shew his
indignation on this occasion.

8:5. Now when Machabeus had gathered a multitude, he could not be
withstood by the heathens: for the wrath of the Lord was turned into
mercy.

8:6. So coming unawares upon the towns and cities, he set them on fire,
and taking possession of the most commodious places, he made no small
slaughter of the enemies:

8:7. And especially in the nights he went upon these expeditions, and
the fame of his valour was spread abroad every where.

8:8. Then Philip seeing that the man gained ground by little and
little, and that things for the most part succeeded prosperously with
him, wrote to Ptolemee, the governor of Celesyria and Phenicia, to send
aid to the king’s affairs.

Philip seeing, etc.... The governor of Jerusalem found himself unable
to contend with Judas, especially after the victories he had obtained
over Apollonius and Seron. 1 Mac. 3.

8:9. And he with all speed sent Nicanor, the son of Patroclus, one of
his special friends, giving him no fewer than twenty thousand armed men
of different nations, to root out the whole race of the Jews, joining
also with him Gorgias, a good soldier, and of great experience in
matters of war.

Twenty thousand.... The whole number of the forces sent at that time
into Judea, was 40,000 footmen, and 7000 horsemen, 1 Mac. 3.30. But
only 20,000 are here taken notice of, because there were no more with
Nicanor at the time of the battle.

8:10. And Nicanor purposed to raise for the king the tribute of two
thousand talents, that was to be given to the Romans, by making so much
money of the captive Jews:

8:11. Wherefore he sent immediately to the cities upon the sea coast,
to invite men together to buy up the Jewish slaves, promising that they
should have ninety slaves for one talent, not reflecting on the
vengeance which was to follow him from the Almighty.

8:12. Now when Judas found that Nicanor was coming, he imparted to the
Jews that were with him, that the enemy was at hand.

8:13. And some of them being afraid, and distrusting the justice of
God, fled away.

8:14. Others sold all that they had left, and withal besought the Lord,
that he would deliver them from the wicked Nicanor, who had sold them
before he came near them:

8:15. And if not for their sakes, yet for the covenant that he had made
with their fathers, and for the sake of his holy and glorious name that
was invoked upon them.

8:16. But Machabeus calling together seven thousand that were with him,
exhorted them not to be reconciled to the enemies, nor to fear the
multitude of the enemies who came wrongfully against them, but to fight
manfully:

Seven thousand.... In the Greek it is six thousand. But then three
thousand of them had no arms. 1 Mac. 4.6.

8:17. Setting before their eyes the injury they had unjustly done the
holy place, and also the injury they had done to the city, which had
been shamefully abused, besides their destroying the ordinances of the
fathers.

8:18. For, said he, they trust in their weapons, and in their boldness:
but we trust in the Almighty Lord, who at a beck can utterly destroy
both them that come against us, and the whole world.

8:19. Moreover, he put them in mind also of the helps their fathers had
received from God: and how, under Sennacherib, a hundred and
eighty-five thousand had been destroyed.

8:20. And of the battle that they had fought against the Galatians, in
Babylonia; how they, being in all but six thousand, when it came to the
point, and the Macedonians, their companions, were at a stand, slew a
hundred and twenty thousand, because of the help they had from heaven,
and for this they received many favours.

Galatians.... That is, the Gauls, who having ravaged Italy and Greece,
poured themselves in upon Asia, in immense multitudes, where also they
founded the kingdom of Galatia or Gallo Graecia.

8:21. With these words they were greatly encouraged and disposed even
to die for the laws and their country.

8:22. So he appointed his brethren captains over each division of his
army; Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, giving to each one fifteen
hundred men.

8:23. And after the holy book had been read to them by Esdras, and he
had given them for a watchword, The help of God: himself leading the
first band, he joined battle with Nicanor:

8:24. And the Almighty being their helper, they slew above nine
thousand men: and having wounded and disabled the greater part of
Nicanor’s army, they obliged them to fly.

Above nine thousand.... Viz., including the three thousand slain in the
pursuit.

8:25. And they took the money of them that came to buy them, and they
pursued them on every side.

8:26. But they came back for want of time: for it was the day before
the sabbath: and therefore they did not continue the pursuit.

8:27. But when they had gathered together their arms and their spoils,
they kept the sabbath: blessing the Lord who had delivered them that
day, distilling the beginning of mercy upon them.

8:28. Then after the sabbath they divided the spoils to the feeble and
the orphans, and the widows, and the rest they took for themselves and
their servants.

8:29. When this was done, and they had all made a common supplication,
they besought the merciful Lord, to be reconciled to his servants unto
the end.

8:30. Moreover, they slew above twenty thousand of them that were with
Timotheus and Bacchides, who fought against them, and they made
themselves masters of the high strong holds: and they divided amongst
them many spoils, giving equal portions to the feeble, the fatherless,
and the widows; yea, and the aged also.

8:31. And when they had carefully gathered together their arms, they
laid them all up in convenient places, and the residue of their spoils
they carried to Jerusalem:

8:32. They slew also Philarches, who was with Timotheus, a wicked man,
who had many ways afflicted the Jews.

8:33. And when they kept the feast of the victory at Jerusalem, they
burnt Callisthenes, that had set fire to the holy gates, who had taken
refuge in a certain house, rendering to him a worthy reward for his
impieties:

8:34. But as for that most wicked man, Nicanor, who had brought a
thousand merchants to the sale of the Jews,

8:35. Being, through the help of the Lord, brought down by them, of
whom he had made no account, laying aside his garment of glory, fleeing
through the midland country, he came alone to Antioch, being rendered
very unhappy by the destruction of his army.

Laying aside his garment of glory.... That is, his splendid apparel,
which he wore through ostentation; he now throws it off, lest he should
be known on his flight.

8:36. And he that had promised to levy the tribute for the Romans, by
the means of the captives of Jerusalem, now professed that the Jews had
God for their protector, and therefore they could not be hurt, because
they followed the laws appointed by him.


2 Machabees Chapter 9

The wretched end, and fruitless repentance of king Antiochus.

9:1. At that time Antiochus returned with dishonour out of Persia.

9:2. For he had entered into the city called Persepolis, and attempted
to rob the temple, and to oppress the city, but the multitude running
together to arms, put them to flight: and so it fell out that Antiochus
being put to flight, returned with disgrace.

Persepolis.... Otherwise called Elymais.

9:3. Now when he was come about Ecbatana, he received the news of what
had happened to Nicanor and Timotheus.

9:4. And swelling with anger, he thought to revenge upon the Jews the
injury done by them that had put him to flight. And therefore he
commanded his chariot to be driven, without stopping in his journey,
the judgment of heaven urging him forward, because he had spoken so
proudly, that he would come to Jerusalem, and make it a common burying
place of the Jews.

9:5. But the Lord, the God of Israel, that seeth all things, struck him
with an incurable and an invisible plague. For as soon as he had ended
these words, a dreadful pain in his bowels came upon him, and bitter
torments of the inner parts.

9:6. And indeed very justly, seeing he had tormented the bowels of
others with many and new torments, albeit he by no means ceased from
his malice.

9:7. Moreover, being filled with pride, breathing out fire in his rage
against the Jews, and commanding the matter to be hastened, it happened
as he was going with violence, that he fell from the chariot, so that
his limbs were much pained by a grievous bruising of the body.

9:8. Thus he that seemed to himself to command even the waves of the
sea, being proud above the condition of man, and to weigh the heights
of the mountains in a balance, now being cast down to the ground, was
carried in a litter, bearing witness to the manifest power of God in
himself:

9:9. So that worms swarmed out of the body of this man, and whilst he
lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell off, and the filthiness of his
smell was noisome to the army.

9:10. And the man that thought a little before he could reach to the
stars of heaven, no man could endure to carry, for the intolerable
stench.

9:11. And by this means, being brought from his great pride, he began
to come to the knowledge of himself, being admonished by the scourge of
God, his pains increasing every moment.

9:12. And when he himself could not now abide his own stench, he spoke
thus: It is just to be subject to God, and that a mortal man should not
equal himself to God.

9:13. Then this wicked man prayed to the Lord, of whom he was not like
to obtain mercy.

Of whom he was not like to obtain mercy.... Because his repentance was
not for the offence committed against God: but barely on account of his
present sufferings.

9:14. And the city, to which he was going in haste to lay it even with
the ground, and to make it a common burying place, he now desireth to
make free:

9:15. And the Jews, whom he said he would not account worthy to be so
much as buried, but would give them up to be devoured by the birds and
wild beasts, and would utterly destroy them with their children, he now
promiseth to make equal with the Athenians.

9:16. The holy temple also, which before he had spoiled, he promised to
adorn with goodly gifts, and to multiply the holy vessels, and to allow
out of his revenues the charges pertaining to the sacrifices.

9:17. Yea also, that he would become a Jew himself, and would go
through every place of the earth, and declare the power of God.

9:18. But his pains not ceasing, (for the just judgment of God was come
upon him) despairing of life, he wrote to the Jews, in the manner of a
supplication, a letter in these words:

9:19. To his very good subjects the Jews, Antiochus, king and ruler,
wisheth much health, and welfare, and happiness.

9:20. If you and your children are well, and if all matters go with you
to your mind, we give very great thanks.

9:21. As for me, being infirm, but yet kindly remembering you,
returning out of the places of Persia, and being taken with a grievous
disease, I thought it necessary to take care for the common good:

9:22. Not distrusting my life, but having great hope to escape the
sickness.

9:23. But considering that my father also, at what time he led an army
into the higher countries, appointed who should reign after him:

9:24. To the end that if any thing contrary to expectation should fall
out, or any bad tidings should be brought, they that were in the
countries, knowing to whom the whole government was left, might not be
troubled.

9:25. Moreover, considering that neighbouring princes, and borderers,
wait for opportunities, and expect what shall be the event, I have
appointed my son, Antiochus, king, whom I often recommended to many of
you, when I went into the higher provinces: and I have written to him
what I have joined here below.

9:26. I pray you, therefore, and request of you, that, remembering
favours both public and private, you will every man of you continue to
be faithful to me and to my son.

9:27. For I trust that he will behave with moderation and humanity, and
following my intentions, will be gracious unto you.

9:28. Thus the murderer and blasphemer being grievously struck, as
himself had treated others, died a miserable death in a strange
country, among the mountains.

9:29. But Philip, that was brought up with him, carried away his body:
and out of fear of the son of Antiochus, went into Egypt to Ptolemee
Philometor.


2 Machabees Chapter 10

The purification of the temple and city. Other exploits of Judas. His
victory over Timotheus.

10:1. But Machabeus, and they that were with him, by the protection of
the Lord, recovered the temple and the city again.

10:2. But he threw down the altars which the heathens had set up in the
streets, as also the temples of the idols.

10:3. And having purified the temple, they made another altar: and
taking fire out of the fiery stones, they offered sacrifices after two
years, and set forth incense, and lamps, and the loaves of proposition.

10:4. And when they had done these things, they besought the Lord,
lying prostrate on the ground, that they might no more fall into such
evils; but if they should at any time sin, that they might be chastised
by him more gently, and not be delivered up to barbarians and
blasphemous men.

10:5. Now upon the same day that the temple had been polluted by the
strangers on the very same day it was cleansed again; to wit, on the
five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu.

10:6. And they kept eight days with joy, after the manner of the feast
of the tabernacles, remembering that not long before they had kept the
feast of the tabernacles when they were in the mountains, and in dens
like wild beasts.

10:7. Therefore they now carried boughs and green branches and palms,
for him that had given them good success in cleansing his place.

10:8. And they ordained by a common statute, and decree, that all the
nation of the Jews should keep those days every year.

10:9. And this was the end of Antiochus, that was called the
Illustrious.

10:10. But now we will repeat the acts of Eupator, the son of that
wicked Antiochus, abridging the account of the evils that happened in
the wars.

10:11. For when he was come to the crown, he appointed over the affairs
of his realm one Lysias, general of the army of Phenicia and Syria.

10:12. For Ptolemee, that was called Macer, was determined to be
strictly just to the Jews and especially by reason of the wrong that
had been done them, and to deal peaceably with them.

10:13. But being accused for this to Eupator by his friends, and being
oftentimes called traitor, because he had left Cyprus, which Philometor
had committed to him, and coming over to Antiochus the Illustrious, had
revolted also from him, he put an end to his life by poison.

10:14. But Gorgias, who was governor of the holds, taking with him the
strangers, often fought against the Jews.

10:15. And the Jews that occupied the most commodious holds, received
those that were driven out of Jerusalem, and attempted to make war.

The Jews, etc.... He speaks of them that had fallen from their
religion, and were enemies of their country, who joining with the
Idumeans or Edomites, kept possession of the strong holds, and from
thence annoyed their countrymen.

10:16. Then they that were with Machabeus, beseeching the Lord by
prayers to be their helper, made a strong attack upon the strong holds
of the Idumeans:

10:17. And assaulting them with great force, won the holds, killed them
that came in the way, and slew altogether no fewer than twenty
thousand.

10:18. And whereas some were fled into very strong towers, having all
manner of provision to sustain a siege,

10:19. Machabeus left Simon and Joseph, and Zacheus, and them that were
with them, in sufficient number to besiege them, and departed to those
expeditions which urged more.

10:20. Now they that were with Simon, being led with covetousness, were
persuaded for the sake of money by some that were in the towers: and
taking seventy thousand didrachmas, let some of them escape.

10:21. But when it was told Machabeus what was done, he assembled the
rulers of the people, and accused those men that they had sold their
brethren for money, having let their adversaries escape.

10:22. So he put these traitors to death, and forthwith took the two
towers.

10:23. And having good success in arms, and all things he took in hand,
he slew more than twenty thousand in the two holds.

10:24. But Timotheus, who before had been overcome by the Jews, having
called together a multitude of foreign troops, and assembled horsemen
out of Asia, came as though he would take Judea by force of arms.

10:25. But Machabeus, and they that were with him, when he drew near,
prayed to the Lord, sprinkling earth upon their heads, and girding
their loins with haircloth,

10:26. And lying prostrate at the foot of the altar, besought him to be
merciful to them, and to be an enemy to their enemies, and an adversary
to their adversaries, as the law saith.

10:27. And so after prayer taking their arms, they went forth further
from the city, and when they were come very near the enemies they
rested.

10:28. But as soon as the sun was risen both sides joined battle: the
one part having, with their valour, the Lord for a surety of victory,
and success: but the other side making their rage their leader in
battle.

10:29. But when they were in the heat of the engagement, there appeared
to the enemies from heaven five men upon horses, comely, with golden
bridles, conducting the Jews:

10:30. Two of them took Machabeus between them, and covered him on
every side with their arms, and kept him safe; but cast darts and
fireballs against the enemy, so that they fell down, being both
confounded with blindness, and filled with trouble.

10:31. And there were slain twenty thousand five hundred, and six
hundred horsemen.

10:32. But Timotheus fled into Gazara, a strong hold where Chereas was
governor.

10:33. Then Machabeus, and they that were with him cheerfully laid
siege to the fortress four days.

10:34. But they that were within, trusting to the strength of the
place, blasphemed exceedingly, and cast forth abominable words.

10:35. But when the fifth day appeared, twenty young men of them that
were with Machabeus, inflamed in their minds, because of the blasphemy,
approached manfully to the wall, and pushing forward with fierce
courage, got up upon it:

10:36. Moreover, others also getting up after them, went to set fire to
the towers and the gates, and to burn the blasphemers alive.

10:37. And having for two days together pillaged and sacked the
fortress, they killed Timotheus, who was found hid in a certain place:
they slew also his brother Chereas, and Apollophanes.

Timotheus.... This man, who was killed at the taking of Gazara, is
different from that Timotheus who is mentioned in the fifth chapter of
the first book of Machabees, and of whom there is mention in the
following chapter.

10:38. And when this was done, they blessed the Lord with hymns and
thanksgiving, who had done great things in Israel, and given them the
victory.


2 Machabees Chapter 11

Lysias is overthrown by Judas. He sues for peace.

11:1. A short time after this Lysias, the king’s lieutenant, and
cousin, and who had chief charge over all the affairs, being greatly
displeased with what had happened,

11:2. Gathered together fourscore thousand men, and all the horsemen,
and came against the Jews, thinking to take the city, and make it a
habitation of the Gentiles:

11:3. And to make a gain of the temple, as of the other temples of the
Gentiles and to set the high priesthood to sale every year:

11:4. Never considering the power of God, but puffed up in mind, and
trusting in the multitude of his foot soldiers, and the thousands of
his horsemen, and his fourscore elephants.

11:5. So he came into Judea, and approaching to Bethsura, which was in
a narrow place, the space of five furlongs from Jerusalem, he laid
siege to that fortress.

11:6. But when Machabeus, and they that were with him, understood that
the strong holds were besieged, they and all the people besought the
Lord with lamentations and tears, that he would send a good angel to
save Israel.

11:7. Then Machabeus himself first taking his arms, exhorted the rest
to expose themselves together with him, to the danger, and to succour
their brethren.

11:8. And when they were going forth together with a willing mind,
there appeared at Jerusalem a horseman going before them in white
clothing, with golden armour, shaking a spear.

11:9. Then they all together blessed the merciful Lord, and took great
courage: being ready to break through not only men, but also the
fiercest beasts, and walls of iron.

11:10. So they went on courageously, having a helper from heaven, and
the Lord, who shewed mercy to them.

11:11. And rushing violently upon the enemy, like lions, they slew of
them eleven thousand footmen, and one thousand six hundred horsemen:

11:12. And put all the rest to flight; and many of them being wounded,
escaped naked: Yea, and Lysias himself fled away shamefully, and
escaped.

11:13. And as he was a man of understanding, considering with himself
the loss he had suffered, and perceiving that the Hebrews could not be
overcome, because they relied upon the help of the Almighty God, he
sent to them:

11:14. And promised that he would agree to all things that are just,
and that he would persuade the king to be their friend.

11:15. Then Machabeus consented to the request of Lysias, providing for
the common good in all things; and whatsoever Machabeus wrote to
Lysias, concerning the Jews, the king allowed of.

11:16. For there were letters written to the Jews from Lysias, to this
effect: Lysias, to the people of the Jews, greeting.

11:17. John, and Abesalom, who were sent from you, delivering your
writings, requested that I would accomplish those things which were
signified by them.

11:18. Therefore whatsoever things could be reported to the king, I
have represented to him: and he hath granted as much as the matter
permitted.

11:19. If, therefore, you will keep yourselves loyal in affairs,
hereafter also I will endeavour to be a means of your good.

11:20. But as concerning other particulars, I have given orders by word
both to these, and to them that are sent by me, to commune with you.

11:21. Fare ye well. In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the four
and twentieth day of the month of Dioscorus.

In the year 148.... Viz., according to the computation followed by the
Greeks; which was different from that of the Hebrews, followed by the
writer of the first book of Machabees. However, by this date, as well
as by other circumstances, it appears that the expedition of Lysias,
mentioned in this chapter, is different from that which is recorded, 1
Mac. 6.

11:22. But the king’s letter contained these words King Antiochus to
Lysias, his brother, greeting.

11:23. Our father being translated amongst the gods we are desirous
that they that are in our realm should live quietly, and apply
themselves diligently to their own concerns.

11:24. And we have heard that the Jews would not consent to my father
to turn to the rites of the Greeks but that they would keep to their
own manner of living and therefore that they request us to allow them
to live after their own laws.

11:25. Wherefore being desirous that this nation also should be at
rest, we have ordained and decreed, that the temple should be restored
to them, and that they may live according to the custom of their
ancestors.

11:26. Thou shalt do well, therefore, to send to them, and grant them
peace, that our pleasure being known, they may be of good comfort, and
look to their own affairs.

11:27. But the king’s letter to the Jews was in this manner: King
Antiochus to the senate of the Jews, and to the rest of the Jews,
greeting.

11:28. If you are well, you are as we desire: we ourselves also are
well.

11:29. Menelaus came to us, saying that you desired to come down to
your countrymen, that are with us.

11:30. We grant, therefore, a safe conduct to all that come and go,
until the thirtieth day of the month of Xanthicus,

11:31. That the Jews may use their own kind of meats, and their own
laws, as before: and that none of them any manner of ways be molested
for things which have been done by ignorance.

11:32. And we have sent also Menelaus to speak to you.

11:33. Fare ye well. In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the
fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.

11:34. The Romans also sent them a letter, to this effect: Quintus
Memmius, and Titus Manilius, ambassadors of the Romans, to the people
of the Jews, greeting.

11:35. Whatsoever Lysias, the king’s cousin, hath granted to you, we
also have granted.

11:36. But touching such things as he thought should be referred to the
king, after you have diligently conferred among yourselves, send some
one forthwith, that we may decree as it is convenient for you: for we
are going to Antioch.

11:37. And therefore make haste to write back, that we may know of what
mind you are.

11:38. Fare ye well. In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the
fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.


2 Machabees Chapter 12

The Jews are still molested by their neighbours. Judas gains divers
victories over them. He orders sacrifice and prayers for the dead.

12:1. When these covenants were made, Lysias went to the king, and the
Jews gave themselves to husbandry.

12:2. But they that were behind, namely, Timotheus, and Apollonius, the
son of Genneus, also Hieronymus, and Demophon, and besides them
Nicanor, the governor of Cyprus, would not suffer them to live in
peace, and to be quiet.

12:3. The men of Joppe also were guilty of this kind of wickedness:
they desired the Jews, who dwelt among them, to go with their wives and
children into the boats, which they had prepared, as though they had no
enmity to them.

12:4. Which when they had consented to, according to the common decree
of the city, suspecting nothing, because of the peace: when they were
gone forth into the deep, they drowned no fewer than two hundred of
them.

12:5. But as soon as Judas heard of this cruelty done to his
countrymen, he commanded the men that were with him: and after having
called upon God, the just judge,

12:6. He came against those murderers of his brethren, and set the
haven on fire in the night, burnt the boats, and slew with the sword
them that escaped from the fire.

12:7. And when he had done these things in this manner, he departed as
if he would return again, and root out all the Joppites.

12:8. But when he understood that the men of Jamnia also designed to do
in like manner to the Jews that dwelt among them,

12:9. He came upon the Jamnites also by night, and set the haven on
fire, with the ships, so that the light of the fire was seen at
Jerusalem, two hundred and forty furlongs off.

12:10. And when they were now gone from thence nine furlongs, and were
marching towards Timotheus, five thousand footmen, and five hundred
horsemen of the Arabians, set upon them.

12:11. And after a hard fight, in which, by the help of God, they got
the victory, the rest of the Arabians being overcome, besought Judas
for peace, promising to give him pastures, and to assist him in other
things.

12:12. And Judas thinking that they might be profitable indeed in many
things, promised them peace, and after having joined hands, they
departed to their tents.

12:13. He also laid siege to a certain strong city, encompassed with
bridges and walls, and inhabited by multitudes of different nations,
the name of which is Casphin.

12:14. But they that were within it, trusting in the strength of the
walls, and the provision of victuals, behaved in a more negligent
manner, and provoked Judas with railing and blaspheming, and uttering
such words as were not to be spoken.

12:15. But Machabeus calling upon the great Lord of the world, who
without any rams or engines of war threw down the walls of Jericho, in
the time of Josue, fiercely assaulted the walls.

Rams.... That is, engines for battering walls, etc., which were used in
sieges in those times.

12:16. And having taken the city by the will of the Lord, he made an
unspeakable slaughter, so that a pool adjoining, of two furlongs broad,
seemed to run with the blood of the slain.

12:17. From thence they departed seven hundred and fifty furlongs, and
came to Characa, to the Jews that are called Tubianites.

12:18. But as for Timotheus, they found him not in those places, for
before he had dispatched any thing he went back, having left a very
strong garrison in a certain hold:

12:19. But Dositheus, and Sosipater, who were captains with Machabeus,
slew them that were left by Timotheus in the hold, to the number of ten
thousand men.

12:20. And Machabeus having set in order about him six thousand men,
and divided them by bands, went forth against Timotheus, who had with
him a hundred and twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand five
hundred horsemen.

12:21. Now when Timotheus had knowledge of the coming of Judas, he sent
the women and children, and the other baggage, before him into a
fortress, called Carnion: for it was impregnable, and hard to come at,
by reason of the straitness of the places.

12:22. But when the first band of Judas came in sight, the enemies were
struck with fear, by the presence of God, who seeth all things, and
they were put to flight one from another, so that they were often
thrown down by their own companions, and wounded with the strokes of
their own swords.

12:23. But Judas was vehemently earnest in punishing the profane, of
whom he slew thirty thousand men.

12:24. And Timotheus himself fell into the hands of the band of
Dositheus and Sosipater, and with many prayers he besought them to let
him go with his life, because he had the parents and brethren of many
of the Jews, who, by his death, might happen to be deceived.

12:25. And when he had given his faith that he would restore them
according to the agreement, they let him go without hurt, for the
saving of their brethren.

12:26. Then Judas went away to Carnion, where he slew five and twenty
thousand persons.

12:27. And after he had put to flight and destroyed these, he removed
his army to Ephron, a strong city, wherein there dwelt a multitude of
divers nations: and stout young men standing upon the walls, made a
vigorous resistance: and in this place there were many engines of war,
and a provision of darts.

12:28. But when they had invocated the Almighty, who with his power
breaketh the strength of the enemies, they took the city: and slew five
and twenty thousand of them that were within.

12:29. From thence they departed to Scythopolis, which lieth six
hundred furlongs from Jerusalem.

Scythopolis.... Formerly called Bethsan.

12:30. But the Jews that were among the Scythopolitans testifying that
they were used kindly by them, and that even in the times of their
adversity they had treated them with humanity:

12:31. They gave them thanks, exhorting them to be still friendly to
their nation, and so they came to Jerusalem, the feast of the weeks
being at hand.

12:32. And after Pentecost they marched against Gorgias, the governor
of Idumea.

12:33. And he came out with three thousand footmen and four hundred
horsemen.

12:34. And when they had joined battle, it happened that a few of the
Jews were slain.

12:35. But Dositheus, a horseman, one of Bacenor’s band, a valiant man,
took hold of Gorgias: and when he would have taken him alive, a certain
horseman of the Thracians came upon him, and cut off his shoulder: and
so Gorgias escaped to Maresa.

12:36. But when they that were with Esdrin had fought long, and were
weary, Judas called upon the Lord to be their helper, and leader of the
battle:

12:37. Then beginning in his own language, and singing hymns with a
loud voice, he put Gorgias’s soldiers to flight.

12:38. So Judas having gathered together his army, came into the city
Odollam: and when the seventh day came, they purified themselves
according to the custom, and kept the sabbath in the same place.

12:39. And the day following Judas came with his company, to take away
the bodies of them that were slain, and to bury them with their
kinsmen, in the sepulchres of their fathers.

12:40. And they found under the coats of the slain, some of the
donaries of the idols of Jamnia, which the law forbiddeth to the Jews:
so that all plainly saw, that for this cause they were slain.

Of the donaries, etc.... That is, of the votive offerings, which had
been hung up in the temples of the idols, which they had taken away
when they burnt the port of Jamnia, ver. 9., contrary to the
prohibition of the law, Deut. 7.25.

12:41. Then they all blessed the just judgment of the Lord, who had
discovered the things that were hidden.

12:42. And so betaking themselves to prayers, they besought him, that
the sin which had been committed might be forgotten. But the most
valiant Judas exhorted the people to keep themselves from sin,
forasmuch as they saw before their eyes what had happened, because of
the sins of those that were slain.

12:43. And making a gathering, he sent twelve thousand drachms of
silver to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the
dead, thinking well and religiously concerning the resurrection.

12:44. (For if he had not hoped that they that were slain should rise
again, it would have seemed superfluous and vain to pray for the dead,)

12:45. And because he considered that they who had fallen asleep with
godliness, had great grace laid up for them.

With godliness.... Judas hoped that these men who died fighting for the
cause of God and religion, might find mercy: either because they might
be excused from mortal sin by ignorance; or might have repented of
their sin, at least at their death.

12:46. It is therefore a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the
dead, that they may be loosed from sins.

It is therefore a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the dead....
Here is an evident and undeniable proof of the practice of praying for
the dead under the old law, which was then strictly observed by the
Jews, and consequently could not be introduced at that time by Judas,
their chief and high priest, if it had not been always their custom.


2 Machabees Chapter 13

Antiochus and Lysias again invade Judea. Menelaus is put to death. The
king’s great army is worsted twice. The peace is renewed.

13:1. In the year one hundred and forty-nine, Judas understood that
Antiochus Eupator was coming with a multitude against Judea,

13:2. And with him Lysias, the regent, who had charge over the affairs
of the realm, having with him a hundred and ten thousand footmen, five
thousand horsemen, twenty-two elephants, and three hundred chariots
armed with hooks.

A hundred and ten thousand, etc.... The difference between the numbers
here set down, and those recorded, 1 Mac. 4, is easily accounted for;
if we consider that such armies as these are liable to be at one time
more numerous than at another; either by sending away large
detachments, or being diminished by sickness; or increased by receiving
fresh supplies of troops, according to different exigencies or
occurrences.

13:3. Menelaus also joined himself with them: and with great
deceitfulness besought Antiochus, not for the welfare of his country,
but in hopes that he should be appointed chief ruler.

13:4. But the King of kings stirred up the mind of Antiochus against
the sinner, and upon Lysias suggesting that he was the cause of all the
evils, he commanded (as the custom is with them) that he should be
apprehended and put to death in the same place.

13:5. Now there was in that place a tower fifty cubits high, having a
heap of ashes on every side: this had a prospect steep down.

13:6. From thence he commanded the sacrilegious wretch to be thrown
down into the ashes, all men thrusting him forward unto death.

13:7. And by such a law it happened that Menelaus the transgressor of
the law, was put to death: not having so much as burial in the earth.

13:8. And indeed very justly, for insomuch as he had committed many
sins against the altar of God, the fire and ashes of which were holy:
he was condemned to die in ashes.

13:9. But the king, with his mind full of rage, came on to shew himself
worse to the Jews than his father was.

13:10. Which when Judas understood, he commanded the people to call
upon the Lord day and night, that as he had always done, so now also he
would help them:

13:11. Because they were afraid to be deprived of the law, and of their
country, and of the holy temple: and that he would not suffer the
people, that had of late taken breath for a little while, to be again
in subjection to blasphemous nations.

13:12. So when they had all done this together, and had craved mercy of
the Lord with weeping and fasting, lying prostrate on the ground for
three days continually, Judas exhorted them to make themselves ready.

13:13. But he, with the ancients, determined before the king should
bring his army into Judea, and make himself master of the city, to go
out, and to commit the event of the thing to the judgment of the Lord.

13:14. So committing all to God, the Creator of the world, and having
exhorted his people to fight manfully, and to stand up even to death
for the laws, the temple, the city, their country, and citizens: he
placed his army about Modin.

13:15. And having given his company for a watchword, The victory of
God, with most valiant chosen young men, he set upon the king’s quarter
by night, and slew four thousand men in the camp, and the greatest of
the elephants, with them that had been upon him,

13:16. And having filled the camp of the enemies with exceeding great
fear and tumult, they went off with good success.

13:17. Now this was done at the break of day, by the protection and
help of the Lord.

13:18. But the king having taken a taste of the hardiness of the Jews,
attempted to take the strong places by policy:

13:19. And he marched with his army to Bethsura, which was a strong
hold of the Jews: but he was repulsed, he failed, he lost his men.

13:20. Now Judas sent necessaries to them that were within

13:21. But Rhodocus, one of the Jews’ army, disclosed the secrets to
the enemies, so he was sought out, and taken up, and put in prison.

13:22. Again the king treated with them that were in Bethsura: gave his
right hand: took theirs: and went away.

13:23. He fought with Judas: and was overcome. And when he understood
that Philip, who had been left over the affairs, had rebelled at
Antioch, he was in a consternation of mind, and entreating the Jews,
and yielding to them, he swore to all things that seemed reasonable,
and, being reconciled, offered sacrifice, honoured the temple, and left
gifts.

13:24. He embraced Machabeus, and made him governor and prince from
Ptolemais unto the Gerrenians.

13:25. But when he was come to Ptolemais, the men of that city were
much displeased with the conditions of the peace, being angry for fear
they should break the covenant.

13:26. Then Lysias went up to the judgment seat, and set forth the
reason, and appeased the people, and returned to Antioch: and thus
matters went with regard to the king’s coming and his return.


2 Machabees Chapter 14

Demetrius challenges the kingdom. Alcimus applies to him to be made
high priest: Nicanor is sent into Judea: his dealings with Judas: his
threats. The history of Razias.

14:1. But after the space of three years Judas, and they that were with
him, understood that Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, was come up with a
great power, and a navy by the haven of Tripolis, to places proper for
his purpose,

14:2. And had made himself master of the countries against Antiochus,
and his general, Lysias.

14:3. Now one Alcimus, who had been chief priest, but had wilfully
defiled himself in the time of mingling with the heathens, seeing that
there was no safety for him, nor access to the altar,

Now Alcimus, who had been chief priest.... This Alcimus was of the
stock of Aaron, but for his apostasy here mentioned was incapable of
the high priesthood, but king Antiochus Eupator appointed him in place
of the high priest, (see above, 1 Mac. chap. 7., ver. 9,) as Menelaus
had been before him, set up by Antiochus (above chap. 4.), yet neither
of them were truly high priests; for the true high priesthood was
amongst the Machabees, who were also of the stock of Aaron, and had
strictly held their religion, and were ordained according to the rites
commanded in the law of Moses.—Ibid. Mingling.... with the heathens;
that is, in their idolatrous worship.

14:4. Came to king Demetrius in the year one hundred and fifty,
presenting unto him a crown of gold, and a palm, and besides these,
some boughs that seemed to belong to the temple. And that day indeed he
held his peace.

14:5. But having gotten a convenient time to further his madness, being
called to counsel by Demetrius, and asked what the Jews relied upon,
and what were their counsels,

14:6. He answered thereunto: They among the Jews that are called
Assideans, of whom Judas Machabeus is captain, nourish wars, and raise
seditions, and will not suffer the realm to be in peace.

14:7. For I also being deprived of my ancestors’ glory (I mean of the
high priesthood) am now come hither:

14:8. Principally indeed out of fidelity to the king’s interests, but
in the next place also to provide for the good of my countrymen: for
all our nation suffereth much from the evil proceedings of these men.

14:9. Wherefore, O king, seeing thou knowest all these things, take
care, I beseech thee, both of the country, and of our nation, according
to thy humanity which is known to all men.

14:10. For as long as Judas liveth it is not possible that the state
should be quiet.

14:11. Now when this man had spoken to this effect the rest also of the
king’s friends, who were enemies of Judas, incensed Demetrius against
him.

14:12. And forthwith he sent Nicanor, the commander over the elephants,
governor into Judea:

14:13. Giving him in charge, to take Judas himself: and disperse all
them that were with him, and to make Alcimus the high priest of the
great temple.

14:14. Then the Gentiles who had fled out of Judea, from Judas, came to
Nicanor by flocks, thinking the miseries and calamities of the Jews to
be the welfare of their affairs.

14:15. Now when the Jews heard of Nicanor’s coming, and that the
nations were assembled against them, they cast earth upon their heads,
and made supplication to him who chose his people to keep them for
ever, and who protected his portion by evident signs.

14:16. Then at the commandment of their captain, they forthwith removed
from the place where they were, and went to the town of Dessau, to meet
them.

14:17. Now Simon, the brother of Judas, had joined battle with Nicanor:
but was frightened with the sudden coming of the adversaries.

14:18. Nevertheless Nicanor hearing of the valour of Judas’s
companions, and the greatness of courage, with which they fought for
their country, was afraid to try the matter by the sword.

14:19. Wherefore he sent Posidonius, and Theodotius and Matthias before
to present and receive the right hands.

14:20. And when there had been a consultation thereupon, and the
captain had acquainted the multitude with it, they were all of one mind
to consent to covenants.

14:21. So they appointed a day upon which they might come together by
themselves: and seats were brought out, and set for each one.

14:22. But Judas ordered armed men to be ready in convenient places,
lest some mischief might be suddenly practised by the enemies: so they
made an agreeable conference.

14:23. And Nicanor abode in Jerusalem, and did no wrong, but sent away
the flocks of the multitudes that had been gathered together.

14:24. And Judas was always dear to him from the heart, and he was well
affected to the man.

14:25. And he desired him to marry a wife, and to have children. So he
married: he lived quietly, and they lived in common.

14:26. But Alcimus seeing the love they had one to another, and the
covenants, came to Demetrius, and told him that Nicanor had assented to
the foreign interest, for that he meant to make Judas, who was a
traitor to the kingdom, his successor.

14:27. Then the king, being in a rage, and provoked with this man’s
wicked accusations, wrote to Nicanor, signifying that he was greatly
displeased with the covenant of friendship: and that he commanded him
nevertheless to send Machabeus prisoner in all haste to Antioch.

14:28. When this was known, Nicanor was in a consternation, and took it
grievously that he should make void the articles that were agreed upon,
having received no injury from the man.

14:29. But because he could not oppose the king, he watched an
opportunity to comply with the orders.

14:30. But when Machabeus perceived that Nicanor was more stern to him,
and that when they met together as usual he behaved himself in a rough
manner; and was sensible that this rough behaviour came not of good, he
gathered together a few of his men, and hid himself from Nicanor.

14:31. But he finding himself notably prevented by the man, came to the
great and holy temple: and commanded the priests that were offering the
accustomed sacrifices, to deliver him the man.

14:32. And when they swore unto him, that they knew not where the man
was whom he sought, he stretched out his hand to the temple,

14:33. And swore, saying: Unless you deliver Judas prisoner to me, I
will lay this temple of God even with the ground, and will beat down
the altar, and I will dedicate this temple to Bacchus.

14:34. And when he had spoken thus, he departed. But the priests
stretching forth their hands to heaven, called upon him that was ever
the defender of their nation, saying in this manner:

14:35. Thou, O Lord of all things, who wantest nothing, wast pleased
that the temple of thy habitation should be amongst us.

14:36. Therefore now, O Lord, the holy of all holies, keep this house
for ever undefiled, which was lately cleansed.

14:37. Now Razias, one of the ancients of Jerusalem, was accused to
Nicanor, a man that was a lover of the city, and of good report, who
for his kindness was called the father of the Jews.

14:38. This man, for a long time, had held fast his purpose of keeping
himself pure in the Jews’ religion, and was ready to expose his body
and life, that he might persevere therein.

14:39. So Nicanor being willing to declare the hatred that he bore the
Jews, sent five hundred soldiers to take him.

14:40. For he thought by ensnaring him to hurt the Jews very much.

14:41. Now as the multitude sought to rush into his house, and to break
open the door, and to set fire to it, when he was ready to be taken, he
struck himself with his sword:

He struck himself, etc.... St. Augustine, (Epist. 61, ad Dulcitium, et
lib. 2, cap. 23, ad Epist. 2, Gaud.) discussing this fact of Razias,
says, that the holy scripture relates it, but doth not praise it, as to
be admired or imitated, and that either it was not well done by him, or
at least not proper in this time of grace.

14:42. Choosing to die nobly rather than to fall into the hands of the
wicked, and to suffer abuses unbecoming his noble birth.

14:43. But whereas through haste he missed of giving a sure wound, and
the crowd was breaking into the doors, he ran boldly to the wall, and
manfully threw himself down to the crowd:

14:44. But they quickly making room for his fall, he came upon the
midst of the neck.

He came upon the midst of the neck.... Venit per mediam cervicem. In
the Greek it is keneona, which signifies a void place, where there is
no building.

14:45. And as he had yet breath in him, being inflamed in mind, he
arose: and while his blood ran down with a great stream, and he was
grievously wounded, he ran through the crowd:

14:46. And standing upon a steep rock, when he was now almost without
blood, grasping his bowels, with both hands he cast them upon the
throng, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, to restore these to
him again: and so he departed this life.


2 Machabees Chapter 15

Judas encouraged by a vision gains a glorious victory over Nicanor. The
conclusion.

15:1. But when Nicanor understood that Judas was in the places of
Samaria, he purposed to set upon him with all violence, on the sabbath
day.

15:2. And when the Jews that were constrained to follow him, said: Do
not act so fiercely and barbarously, but give honour to the day that is
sanctified: and reverence him that beholdeth all things:

15:3. That unhappy man asked, if there were a mighty One in heaven,
that had commanded the sabbath day to be kept.

15:4. And when they answered: There is the living Lord himself in
heaven, the mighty One, that commanded the seventh day to be kept.

15:5. Then he said: And I am mighty upon the earth, and I command to
take arms, and to do the king’s business. Nevertheless he prevailed not
to accomplish his design.

15:6. So Nicanor being puffed up with exceeding great pride, thought to
set up a public monument of his victory over Judas.

15:7. But Machabeus ever trusted with all hope that God would help
them.

15:8. And he exhorted his people not to fear the coming of the nations,
but to remember the help they had before received from heaven, and now
to hope for victory from the Almighty.

15:9. And speaking to them out of the law, and the prophets, and withal
putting them in mind of the battles they had fought before, he made
them more cheerful:

15:10. Then after he had encouraged them, he shewed withal the
falsehood of the Gentiles, and their breach of oaths.

15:11. So he armed every one of them, not with defence of shield and
spear, but with very good speeches, and exhortations, and told them a
dream worthy to be believed, whereby he rejoiced them all.

15:12. Now the vision was in this manner. Onias, who had been high
priest, a good and virtuous man, modest in his looks, gentle in his
manners, and graceful in speech, and who from a child was exercised in
virtues holding up his hands, prayed for all the people of the Jews:

15:13. After this there appeared also another man, admirable for age,
and glory, and environed with great beauty and majesty:

15:14. Then Onias answering, said: This is a lover of his brethren, and
of the people of Israel: this is he that prayeth much for the people,
and for all the holy city, Jeremias, the prophet of God.

15:15. Whereupon Jeremias stretched forth his right hand, and gave to
Judas a sword of gold, saying:

15:16. Take this holy sword, a gift from God, wherewith thou shalt
overthrow the adversaries of my people Israel.

15:17. Thus being exhorted with the words of Judas, which were very
good, and proper to stir up the courage, and strengthen the hearts of
the young men, they resolved to fight, and to set upon them manfully:
that valour might decide the matter, because the holy city, and the
temple were in danger.

15:18. For their concern was less for their wives, and children, and
for their brethren, and kinsfolks: but their greatest and principal
fear was for the holiness of the temple.

15:19. And they also that were in the city, had no little concern for
them that were to be engaged in battle.

15:20. And now when all expected what judgment would be given, and the
enemies were at hand, and the army was set in array, the beasts and the
horsemen ranged in convenient places,

15:21. Machabeus considering the coming of the multitude, and the
divers preparations of armour, and the fierceness of the beasts,
stretching out his hands to heaven, called upon the Lord, that worketh
wonders, who giveth victory to them that are worthy, not according to
the power of their arms, but according as it seemeth good to him.

15:22. And in his prayer he said after this manner: Thou, O Lord, who
didst send thy angel in the time of Ezechias, king of Juda, and didst
kill a hundred and eighty-five thousand of the army of Sennacherib:

15:23. Send now also, O Lord of heaven, thy good angel before us, for
the fear and dread of the greatness of thy arm,

15:24. That they may be afraid, who come with blasphemy against thy
holy people. And thus he concluded his prayer.

15:25. But Nicanor, and they that were with him came forward, with
trumpets and songs.

15:26. But Judas, and they that were with him, encountered them,
calling upon God by prayers:

15:27. So fighting with their hands, but praying to the Lord with their
hearts, they slew no less than five and thirty thousand, being greatly
cheered with the presence of God.

15:28. And when the battle was over, and they were returning with joy,
they understood that Nicanor was slain in his armour.

15:29. Then making a shout, and a great noise, they blessed the
Almighty Lord in their own language.

15:30. And Judas, who was altogether ready, in body and mind, to die
for his countrymen, commanded that Nicanor’s head, and his hand, with
the shoulder, should be cut off, and carried to Jerusalem.

15:31. And when he was come thither, having called together his
countrymen, and the priests to the altar, he sent also for them that
were in the castle,

15:32. And shewing them the head of Nicanor, and the wicked hand, which
he had stretched out, with proud boasts, against the holy house of the
Almighty God,

15:33. He commanded also, that the tongue of the wicked Nicanor should
be cut out, and given by pieces to birds, and the hand of the furious
man to be hanged up over against the temple.

15:34. Then all blessed the Lord of heaven, saying: Blessed be he that
hath kept his own place undefiled.

15:35. And he hung up Nicanor’s head in the top of the castle, that it
might be an evident and manifest sign of the help of God.

15:36. And they all ordained by a common decree, by no means to let
this day pass without solemnity:

15:37. But to celebrate the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, called
in the Syrian language, the day before Mardochias’ day.

15:38. So these things being done with relation to Nicanor, and from
that time the city being possessed by the Hebrews, I also will here
make an end of my narration.

15:39. Which if I have done well, and as it becometh the history, it is
what I desired: but if not so perfectly, it must be pardoned me.

If not so perfectly, etc.... This is not said with regard to the truth
of the narration; but with regard to the style and manner of writing:
which in the sacred penmen is not always the most accurate. See St.
Paul, 2 Cor. 11.6.

15:40. For as it is hurtful to drink always wine, or always water, but
pleasant to use sometimes the one, and sometimes the other: so if the
speech be always nicely framed, it will not be grateful to the readers.
But here it shall be ended.




THE NEW TESTAMENT OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST




THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO SAINT MATTHEW


Saint Matthew, one of the twelve Apostles, who from being a publican,
that is, a taxgatherer, was called by our Saviour to the Apostleship:
in that profession his name is Levi. (Luke 5.27, and Mark 2.14.) He was
the first of the Evangelists that wrote the Gospel, and that in Hebrew
or Syro-Chaldaic which the Jews in Palestine spoke at that time. The
original is not now extant; but it was translated in the time of the
Apostles into Greek, that version was of equal authority. He wrote
about six years after the Lord’s Ascension.


Matthew Chapter 1

The genealogy of Christ: he is conceived and born of a virgin.

1:1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham:

1:2. Abraham begot Isaac. And Isaac begot Jacob. And Jacob begot Judas
and his brethren.

1:3. And Judas begot Phares and Zara of Thamar. And Phares begot Esron.
And Esron begot Aram.

1:4. And Aram begot Aminadab. And Aminadab begot Naasson. And Naasson
begot Salmon.

1:5. And Salmon begot Booz of Rahab. And Booz begot Obed of Ruth. And
Obed begot Jesse.

1:6. And Jesse begot David the king. And David the king begot Solomon,
of her that had been the wife of Urias.

1:7. And Solomon begot Roboam. And Roboam begot Abia. And Abia begot
Asa.

1:8. And Asa begot Josaphat. And Josaphat begot Joram. And Joram begot
Ozias.

1:9. And Ozias begot Joatham. And Joatham begot Achaz. And Achaz begot
Ezechias.

1:10. And Ezechias begot Manasses. And Manasses begot Amon. And Amon
begot Josias.

1:11. And Josias begot Jechonias and his brethren in the transmigration
of Babylon.

1:12. And after the transmigration of Babylon, Jechonias begot
Salathiel. And Salathiel begot Zorobabel.

1:13. And Zorobabel begot Abiud. And Abiud begot Eliacim. And Eliacim
begot Azor.

1:14. And Azor begot Sadoc. And Sadoc begot Achim. And Achim begot
Eliud.

1:15. And Eliud begot Eleazar. And Eleazar begot Mathan. And Mathan
begot Jacob.

1:16. And Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born
Jesus, who is called Christ.

The husband of Mary.... The Evangelist gives us rather the pedigree of
St. Joseph, than that of the blessed Virgin, to conform to the custom
of the Hebrews, who in their genealogies took no notice of women; but
as they were near akin, the pedigree of the one sheweth that of the
other.

1:17. So all the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen
generations. And from David to the transmigration of Babylon, are
fourteen generations: and from the transmigration of Babylon to Christ
are fourteen generations.

1:18. Now the generation of Christ was in this wise. When as his mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found
with child, of the Holy Ghost.

1:19. Whereupon Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing
publicly to expose her, was minded to put her away privately.

1:20. But while he thought on these things, behold the Angel of the
Lord appeared to him in his sleep, saying: Joseph, son of David, fear
not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in
her, is of the Holy Ghost.

1:21. And she shall bring forth a son: and thou shalt call his name
Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins.

1:22. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which the Lord
spoke by the prophet, saying:

1:23. Behold a virgin shall be with child, and bring forth a son, and
they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with
us.

1:24. And Joseph rising up from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had
commanded him, and took unto him his wife.

1:25. And he knew her not till she brought forth her first born son:
and he called his name Jesus.

Till she brought forth her firstborn son.... From these words Helvidius
and other heretics most impiously inferred that the blessed Virgin Mary
had other children besides Christ; but St. Jerome shews, by divers
examples, that this expression of the Evangelist was a manner of
speaking usual among the Hebrews, to denote by the word until, only
what is done, without any regard to the future. Thus it is said,
Genesis 8. 6 and 7, that Noe sent forth a raven, which went forth, and
did not return till the waters were dried up on the earth. That is, did
not return any more. Also Isaias 46. 4, God says: I am till you grow
old. Who dare infer that God should then cease to be: Also in the first
book of Machabees 5. 54, And they went up to mount Sion with joy and
gladness, and offered holocausts, because not one of them was slain
till they had returned in peace. That is, not one was slain before or
after they had returned. God saith to his divine Son: Sit on my right
hand till I make thy enemies thy footstool. Shall he sit no longer
after his enemies are subdued? Yea and for all eternity. St. Jerome
also proves by Scripture examples, that an only begotten son, was also
called firstborn, or first begotten: because according to the law, the
firstborn males were to be consecrated to God; Sanctify unto me, saith
the Lord, every firstborn that openeth the womb among the children of
Israel, etc. Ex. 13. 2.


Matthew Chapter 2

The offerings of the wise men: the flight into Egypt: the massacre of
the Innocents.

2:1. When Jesus therefore was born in Bethlehem of Juda, in the days of
king Herod, behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem,

2:2. Saying: Where is he that is born king of the Jews? For we have
seen his star in the East, and are come to adore him.

2:3. And king Herod hearing this, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with
him.

2:4. And assembling together all the chief priests and the scribes of
the people, he inquired of them where Christ should be born.

2:5. But they said to him: In Bethlehem of Juda. For so it is written
by the prophet:

2:6. And thou Bethlehem the land of Juda art not the least among the
princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come forth the captain that
shall rule my people Israel.

2:7. Then Herod, privately calling the wise men learned diligently of
them the time of the star which appeared to them;

2:8. And sending them into Bethlehem, said: Go and diligently inquire
after the child, and when you have found him, bring me word again, that
I also may come and adore him.

2:9. Who having heard the king, went their way; and behold the star
which they had seen in the East, went before them, until it came and
stood over where the child was.

2:10. And seeing the star they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

2:11. And entering into the house, they found the child with Mary his
mother, and falling down they adored him: and opening their treasures,
they offered him gifts; gold, frankincense, and myrrh.

2:12. And having received an answer in sleep that they should not
return to Herod, they went back another way into their country.

2:13. And after they were departed, behold an angel of the Lord
appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying: Arise, and take the child and his
mother, and fly into Egypt: and be there until I shall tell thee. For
it will come to pass that Herod will seek the child to destroy him.

2:14. Who arose, and took the child and his mother by night, and
retired into Egypt: and he was there until the death of Herod:

2:15. That it might be fulfilled which the Lord spoke by the prophet,
saying: Out of Egypt have I called my son.

2:16. Then Herod perceiving that he was deluded by the wise men, was
exceeding angry: and sending killed all the menchildren that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from two years old and
under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the
wise men.

2:17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
saying:

2:18. A voice in Rama was heard, lamentation and great mourning; Rachel
bewailing her children, and would not be comforted, because they are
not.

2:19. But when Herod was dead, behold an angel of the Lord appeared in
sleep to Joseph in Egypt,

2:20. Saying: Arise, and take the child and his mother, and go into the
land of Israel. For they are dead that sought the life of the child.

2:21. Who arose, and took the child and his mother, and came into the
land of Israel.

2:22. But hearing that Archelaus reigned in Judea in the room of Herod
his father, he was afraid to go thither: and being warned in sleep
retired into the quarters of Galilee.

2:23. And coming he dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be
fulfilled which was said by the prophets: That he shall be called a
Nazarene.


Matthew Chapter 3

The preaching of John: Christ is baptized.

3:1. And in those days cometh John the Baptist preaching in the desert
of Judea.

3:2. And saying: Do penance: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Do penance.... Paenitentiam agite. Which word, according to the use of
the scriptures and the holy fathers, does not only signify repentance
and amendment of life, but also punishing past sins by fasting, and
such like penitential exercises.

3:3. For this is he that was spoken of by Isaias the prophet, saying: A
voice of one crying in the desert, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
straight his paths.

3:4. And the same John had his garment of camel’s hair, and a leathern
girdle about his loins: and his meat was locusts and wild honey.

3:5. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the country
about Jordan:

3:6. And were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.

3:7. And seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his
baptism, he said to them: Ye brood of vipers, who hath shewed you to
flee from the wrath to come?

Pharisees and Sadducees.... These were two sects among the Jews: of
which the former were for the most part notorious hypocrites; the
latter, a kind of freethinkers in matters of religion.

3:8. Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of penance.

3:9. And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our
father. For I tell you that God is able of these stones to raise up
children to Abraham.

3:10. For now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree
therefore that doth not yield good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast
into the fire.

3:11. I indeed baptize you in water unto penance, but he that shall
come after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear:
he shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and fire.

3:12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his
floor and gather his wheat into the barn; but the chaff he will burn
with unquenchable fire.

3:13. Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan, unto John, to be
baptized by him.

3:14. But John stayed him, saying: I ought to be baptized by thee, and
comest thou to me?

3:15. And Jesus answering, said to him: Suffer it to be so now. For so
it becometh us to fulfil all justice. Then he suffered him.

3:16. And Jesus being baptized, forthwith came out of the water: and
lo, the heavens were opened to him: and he saw the Spirit of God
descending as a dove, and coming upon him.

3:17. And behold a voice from heaven saying: This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.


Matthew Chapter 4

Christ’s fast of forty days: He is tempted. He begins to preach, to
call disciples to him, and to work miracles.

4:1. Then Jesus was led by the spirit into the desert, to be tempted by
the devil.

4:2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he
was hungry.

4:3. And the tempter coming said to him: If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

4:4. Who answered and said: It is written, Not in bread alone doth man
live, but in every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God.

4:5. Then the devil took him up into the holy city, and set him upon
the pinnacle of the temple,

4:6. And said to him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down, for
it is written: That he hath given his angels charge over thee, and in
their hands shall they bear thee up, lest perhaps thou dash thy foot
against a stone.

4:7. Jesus said to him: It is written again: Thou shalt not tempt the
Lord thy God.

4:8. Again the devil took him up into a very high mountain, and shewed
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,

Shewed him, etc.... That is, pointed out to him where each kingdom lay;
and set forth in words what was most glorious and admirable in each of
them. Or also set before his eyes, as it were in a large map, a lively
representation of all those kingdoms.

4:9. And said to him: All these will I give thee, if falling down thou
wilt adore me.

4:10. Then Jesus saith to him: Begone, Satan: for it is written: The
Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only shalt thou serve.

4:11. Then the devil left him; and behold angels came and ministered to
him.

4:12. And when Jesus had heard that John was delivered up, he retired
into Galilee:

4:13. And leaving the city Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capharnaum on
the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and of Nephthalim;

4:14. That it might be fulfilled which was said by Isaias the prophet:

4:15. Land of Zabulon and land of Nephthalim, the way of the sea beyond
the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles:

4:16. The people that sat in darkness, hath seen great light: and to
them that sat in the region of the shadow of death, light is sprung up.

4:17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say: Do penance, for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

4:18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea
(for they were fishers).

4:19. And he saith to them: Come ye after me, and I will make you to be
fishers of men.

4:20. And they immediately leaving their nets, followed him.

4:21. And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the
son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their
father, mending their nets: and he called them.

4:22. And they forthwith left their nets and father, and followed him.

4:23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
and preaching the gospel of the kingdom: and healing all manner of
sickness and every infirmity, among the people.

4:24. And his fame went throughout all Syria, and they presented to him
all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and
such as were possessed by devils, and lunatics, and those that had the
palsy, and he cured them:

4:25. And much people followed him from Galilee, and from Decapolis,
and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.


Matthew Chapter 5

Christ’s sermon upon the mount. The eight beatitudes.

5:1. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain, and when he
was set down, his disciples came unto him.

5:2. And opening his mouth he taught them, saying:

5:3. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.

The poor in spirit.... That is, the humble; and they whose spirit is
not set upon riches.

5:4. Blessed are the meek: for they shall possess the land.

5:5. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

5:6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice: for they
shall have their fill.

5:7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

5:8. Blessed are the clean of heart: for they shall see God.

5:9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children
of God.

5:10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice’ sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

5:11. Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and
speak all that is evil against you, untruly, for my sake:

5:12. Be glad and rejoice for your reward is very great in heaven. For
so they persecuted the prophets that were before you.

5:13. You are the salt of the earth. But if the salt lose its savour,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is good for nothing anymore but to be
cast out, and to be trodden on by men.

5:14. You are the light of the world. A city seated on a mountain
cannot be hid.

5:15. Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but upon
a candlestick, that it may shine to all that are in the house.

5:16. So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

5:17. Do not think that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets.
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.

To fulfil.... By accomplishing all the figures and prophecies; and
perfecting all that was imperfect.

5:18. For amen I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or
one tittle shall not pass of the law, till all be fulfilled.

Amen.... That is, assuredly of a truth.... This Hebrew word, amen, is
here retained by the example and authority of all the four Evangelists.
It is used by our Lord as a strong asseveration, and affirmation of the
truth.

5:19. He therefore that shall break one of these least commandments,
and shall so teach men shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven. But he that shall do and teach, he shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.

5:20. For I tell you, that unless your justice abound more than that of
the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

The scribes and Pharisees.... The scribes were the doctors of the law
of Moses: the Pharisees were a precise set of men, making profession of
a more exact observance of the law: and upon that account greatly
esteemed among the people.

5:21. You have heard that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not
kill. And whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.

Shall be in danger of the judgment.... That is, shall deserve to be
punished by that lesser tribunal among the Jews, called the Judgment,
which took cognizance of such crimes.

5:22. But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall
be in danger of the judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of the council. And whosoever shall say, Thou
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

Raca.... A word expressing great indignation or contempt. Shall be in
danger of the council.... That is, shall deserve to be punished by the
highest court of judicature, called the Council, or Sanhedrim,
consisting of seventy-two persons, where the highest causes were tried
and judged, which was at Jerusalem. Thou fool.... This was then looked
upon as a heinous injury, when uttered with contempt, spite, or malice:
and therefore is here so severely condemned. Shall be in danger of hell
fire.... literally, according to the Greek, shall deserve to be cast
into the Gehenna of fire. Which words our Saviour made use of to
express the fire and punishments of hell.

5:23. If therefore thou offer thy gift at the altar, and there thou
remember that thy brother hath anything against thee;

5:24. Leave there thy offering before the altar, and go first to be
reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift.

5:25. Be at agreement with thy adversary betimes, whilst thou art in
the way with him: lest perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the judge,
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into
prison.

5:26. Amen I say to thee, thou shalt not go out from thence till thou
repay the last farthing.

5:27. You have heard that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not
commit adultery.

5:28. But I say to you, that whosoever shall look on a woman to lust
after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart.

5:29. And if thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out and cast it
from thee. For it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should
perish, rather than thy whole body be cast into hell.

Scandalize thee.... That is, if it be a stumblingblock, or occasion of
sin to thee. By which we are taught to fly the immediate occasions of
sin, though they be as dear to us, or as necessary as a hand or an eye.

5:30. And if thy right hand scandalize thee, cut it off, and cast it
from thee: for it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should
perish, rather than that thy whole body go into hell.

5:31. And it hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him
give her a bill of divorce.

5:32. But I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife,
excepting for the cause of fornication, maketh her to commit adultery:
and he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth adultery.

5:33. Again you have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shalt
not forswear thyself: but thou shalt perform thy oaths to the Lord.

5:34. But I say to you not to swear at all, neither by heaven for it is
the throne of God:

Not to swear at all.... It is not forbid to swear in truth, justice and
judgment; to the honour of God, or our own or neighbour’s just defence:
but only to swear rashly, or profanely, in common discourse, and
without necessity.

5:35. Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: nor by Jerusalem, for
it is the city of the great king:

5:36. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make
one hair white or black.

5:37. But let your speech be yea, yea: no, no: and that which is over
and above these, is of evil.

5:38. You have heard that it hath been said: An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth.

5:39. But I say to you not to resist evil: but if one strike thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him also the other:

Not to resist evil, etc.... What is here commanded, is a Christian
patience under injuries and affronts, and to be willing even to suffer
still more, rather than to indulge the desire of revenge: but what is
further added does not strictly oblige according to the letter, for
neither did Christ nor St. Paul turn the other cheek. St. John 18., and
Acts 23.

5:40. And if a man will contend with thee in judgment, and take away
thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto him.

5:41. And whosoever will force thee one mile, go with him other two.

5:42. Give to him that asketh of thee, and from him that would borrow
of thee turn not away.

5:43. You have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour, and hate thy enemy.

5:44. But I say to you, Love your enemies: do good to them that hate
you: and pray for them that persecute and calumniate you:

5:45. That you may be the children of your Father who is in heaven, who
maketh his sun to rise upon the good, and bad, and raineth upon the
just and the unjust.

5:46. For if you love them that love you, what reward shall you have?
do not even the publicans this?

The publicans.... These were the gatherers of the public taxes: a set
of men, odious and infamous among the Jews, for their extortions and
injustice.

5:47. And if you salute your brethren only, what do you more? do not
also the heathens this?

5:48. Be you therefore perfect, as also your heavenly Father is
perfect.


Matthew Chapter 6

A continuation of the sermon on the mount.

6:1. Take heed that you do not your justice before men, to be seen by
them: otherwise you shall not have a reward of your Father who is in
heaven.

Your justice.... that is, works of justice; viz., fasting, prayer, and
almsdeeds; which ought to be performed not out of ostentation, or a
view to please men, but solely to please God.

6:2. Therefore when thou dost an alms-deed, sound not a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that
they may be honoured by men. Amen I say to you, they have received
their reward.

6:3. But when thou dost alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand doth.

6:4. That thy alms may be in secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret
will repay thee.

6:5. And when ye pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, that love to
stand and pray in the synagogues and corners of the streets, that they
may be seen by men: Amen I say to you, they have received their reward.

6:6. But thou when thou shalt pray, enter into thy chamber, and having
shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret, and thy father who seeth
in secret will repay thee.

6:7. And when you are praying, speak not much, as the heathens. For
they think that in their much speaking they may be heard.

6:8. Be not you therefore like to them for your Father knoweth what is
needful for you, before you ask him.

6:9. Thus therefore shall you pray: Our Father who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name.

6:10. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

6:11. Give us this day our supersubstantial bread.

Supersubstantial bread.... In St. Luke the same word is rendered daily
bread. It is understood of the bread of life, which we receive in the
Blessed Sacrament.

6:12. And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.

6:13. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Lead us not into temptation.... That is, suffer us not to be overcome
by temptation.

6:14. For if you will forgive men their offences, your heavenly Father
will forgive you also your offences.

6:15. But if you will not forgive men, neither will your Father forgive
you your offences.

6:16. And when you fast, be not as the hypocrites, sad. For they
disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Amen I
say to you, they have received their reward.

6:17. But thou, when thou fastest anoint thy head, and wash thy face;

6:18. That thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father who is in
secret: and thy Father who seeth in secret, will repay thee.

6:19. Lay not up to yourselves treasures on earth: where the rust, and
moth consume, and where thieves break through, and steal.

6:20. But lay up to yourselves treasures in heaven: where neither the
rust nor moth doth consume, and where thieves do not break through, nor
steal.

6:21. For where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also.

6:22. The light of thy body is thy eye. If thy eye be single, thy whole
body shall be lightsome.

6:23. But if thy eye be evil thy whole body shall be darksome. If then
the light that is in thee, be darkness: the darkness itself how great
shall it be!

6:24. No man can serve two masters. For either he will hate the one,
and love the other: or he will sustain the one, and despise the other.
You cannot serve God and mammon.

Mammon.... That is, riches, worldly interest.

6:25. Therefore I say to you, be not solicitous for your life, what you
shall eat, nor for your body, what you shall put on. Is not the life
more than the meat: and the body more than the raiment?

6:26. Behold the birds of the air, for they neither sow, nor do they
reap, nor gather into barns: and your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are
not you of much more value than they?

6:27. And which of you by taking thought, can add to his stature one
cubit?

6:28. And for raiment why are you solicitous? Consider the lilies of
the field, how they grow: they labour not, neither do they spin.

6:29. But I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was
arrayed as one of these.

6:30. And if the grass of the field, which is to day, and to morrow is
cast into the oven, God doth so clothe: how much more you, O ye of
little faith?

6:31. Be not solicitous therefore, saying: What shall we eat: or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed?

6:32. For after all these things do the heathens seek. For your Father
knoweth that you have need of all these things.

6:33. Seek ye therefore first the kingdom of God, and his justice, and
all these things shall be added unto you.

6:34. Be not therefore solicitous for to morrow; for the morrow will be
solicitous for itself. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.


Matthew Chapter 7

The third part of the sermon on the mount.

7:1. Judge not, that you may not be judged.

7:2. For with what judgment you judge, you shall be judged: and with
what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again.

7:3. And why seest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye; and
seest not the beam that is in thy own eye?

7:4. Or how sayest thou to thy brother: Let me cast the mote out of thy
eye; and behold a beam is in thy own eye?

7:5. Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thy own eye, and
then shalt thou see to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye.

7:6. Give not that which is holy to dogs; neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and
turning upon you, they tear you.

7:7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock,
and it shall be opened to you.

7:8. For every one that asketh, receiveth: and he that seeketh,
findeth: and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

7:9. Or what man is there among you, of whom if his son shall ask
bread, will he reach him a stone?

7:10. Or if he shall ask him a fish, will he reach him a serpent?

7:11. If you then being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children: how much more will your Father who is in heaven, give good
things to them that ask him?

7:12. All things therefore whatsoever you would that men should do to
you, do you also to them. For this is the law and the prophets.

7:13. Enter ye in at the narrow gate: for wide is the gate, and broad
is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there are who go in
thereat.

7:14. How narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leadeth to
life: and few there are that find it!

7:15. Beware of false prophets, who come to you in the clothing of
sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

7:16. By their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles?

7:17. Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil
tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

7:18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil
tree bring forth good fruit.

7:19. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be cut down,
and shall be cast into the fire.

7:20. Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them.

7:21. Not every one that saith to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven: but he that doth the will of my Father who is in
heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

7:22. Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have not we
prophesied in thy name, and cast out devils in thy name, and done many
miracles in thy name?

7:23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from
me, you that work iniquity.

7:24. Every one therefore that heareth these my words, and doth them,
shall be likened to a wise man that built his house upon a rock,

7:25. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
they beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded on a
rock.

7:26. And every one that heareth these my words and doth them not,
shall be like a foolish man that built his house upon the sand,

7:27. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
they beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall thereof.

7:28. And it came to pass when Jesus had fully ended these words, the
people were in admiration at his doctrine.

7:29. For he was teaching them as one having power, and not as the
scribes and Pharisees.


Matthew Chapter 8

Christ cleanses the leper, heals the centurion’s servant, Peter’s
mother-in-law, and many others: he stills the storm at sea, drives the
devils out of two men possessed, and suffers them to go into the swine.

8:1. And when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes
followed him:

8:2. And behold a leper came and adored him, saying: Lord, if thou
wilt, thou canst make me clean.

8:3. And Jesus stretching forth his hand, touched him, saying: I will,
be thou made clean. And forthwith his leprosy was cleansed.

8:4. And Jesus saith to him: See thou tell no man: but go, shew thyself
to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded, for a
testimony unto them.

8:5. And when he had entered into Capharnaum, there came to him a
centurion, beseeching him,

8:6. And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, and
is grievously tormented.

8:7. And Jesus saith to him: I will come and heal him.

8:8. And the centurion, making answer, said: Lord, I am not worthy that
thou shouldst enter under my roof; but only say the word, and my
servant shall be healed.

8:9. For I also am a man subject to authority, having under me
soldiers; and I say to this, Go, and he goeth, and to another Come, and
he cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.

8:10. And Jesus hearing this, marvelled; and said to them that followed
him. Amen I say to you, I have not found so great faith in Israel.

8:11. And I say to you that many shall come from the east and the west,
and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven:

8:12. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into the
exterior darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

8:13. And Jesus said to the centurion: Go, and as thou hast believed,
so be it done to thee. And the servant was healed at the same hour.

8:14. And when Jesus was come into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s
mother lying, and sick of a fever;

8:15. And he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose
and ministered to them.

8:16. And when evening was come, they brought to him many that were
possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word: and
all that were sick he healed:

8:17. That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet
Isaias, saying: He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.

8:18. And Jesus seeing great multitudes about him, gave orders to pass
over the water.

8:19. And a certain scribe came and said to him: Master, I will follow
thee whithersoever thou shalt go.

8:20. And Jesus saith to him: The foxes have holes, and the birds of
the air nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

8:21. And another of his disciples said to him: Lord, suffer me first
to go and bury my father.

8:22. But Jesus said to him: Follow me, and let the dead bury their
dead.

8:23. And when he entered into the boat, his disciples followed him:

8:24. And behold a great tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was
covered with waves, but he was asleep.

8:25. And they came to him, and awaked him, saying: Lord, save us, we
perish.

8:26. And Jesus saith to them: Why are you fearful, O ye of little
faith? Then rising up, he commanded the winds, and the sea, and there
came a great calm.

8:27. But the men wondered, saying: What manner of man is this, for the
winds and the sea obey him?

8:28. And when he was come on the other side of the water, into the
country of the Gerasens, there met him two that were possessed with
devils, coming out of the sepulchres, exceeding fierce, so that none
could pass by that way.

8:29. And behold they cried out, saying: What have we to do with thee,
Jesus Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

8:30. And there was, not far from them, a herd of many swine feeding.

8:31. And the devils besought him, saying: If thou cast us out hence,
send us into the herd of swine.

8:32. And he said to them: Go. But they going out went into the swine,
and behold the whole herd ran violently down a steep place into the
sea: and they perished in the waters.

8:33. And they that kept them fled: and coming into the city, told
every thing, and concerning them that had been possessed by the devils.

8:34. And behold the whole city went out to meet Jesus, and when they
saw him, they besought him that he would depart from their coasts.


Matthew Chapter 9

Christ heals one sick of palsy: calls Matthew: cures the issue of
blood: raises to life the daughter of Jairus: gives sight to two blind
men: and heals a dumb man possessed by the devil.

9:1. And entering into a boat, he passed over the water and came into
his own city.

9:2. And behold they brought to him one sick of the palsy lying in a
bed. And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the man sick of the palsy:
Be of good heart, son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

9:3. And behold some of the scribes said within themselves: He
blasphemeth.

9:4. And Jesus seeing their thoughts, said: Why do you think evil in
your hearts?

9:5. Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee: or to say,
Arise, and walk?

9:6. But that you may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to
forgive sins, (then said he to the man sick of the palsy,) Arise, take
up thy bed, and go into thy house.

9:7. And he arose, and went into his house.

9:8. And the multitude seeing it, feared, and glorified God that gave
such power to men.

9:9. And when Jesus passed on from thence, he saw a man sitting in the
custom house, named Matthew; and he saith to him: Follow me. And he
arose up and followed him.

9:10. And it came to pass as he was sitting at meat in the house,
behold many publicans and sinners came, and sat down with Jesus and his
disciples.

9:11. And the Pharisees seeing it, said to his disciples: Why doth your
master eat with publicans and sinners?

9:12. But Jesus hearing it, said: They that are in health need not a
physician, but they that are ill.

9:13. Go then and learn what this meaneth, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice. For I am not come to call the just, but sinners.

9:14. Then came to him the disciples of John, saying: Why do we and the
Pharisees, fast often, but thy disciples do not fast?

9:15. And Jesus said to them: Can the children of the bridegroom mourn,
as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come, when
the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then they shall fast.

Can the children of the bridegroom.... This, by a Hebraism, signifies
the friends or companions of the bridegroom.

9:16. And nobody putteth a piece of raw cloth unto an old garment. For
it taketh away the fulness thereof from the garment, and there is made
a greater rent.

9:17. Neither do they put new wine into old bottles. Otherwise the
bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish. But
new wine they put into new bottles: and both are preserved.

9:18. As he was speaking these things unto them, behold a certain ruler
came up, and adored him, saying: Lord, my daughter is even now dead;
but come, lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.

9:19. And Jesus rising up followed him, with his disciples.

9:20. And behold a woman who was troubled with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment.

9:21. For she said within herself: If I shall touch only his garment, I
shall be healed.

9:22. But Jesus turning and seeing her, said: Be of good heart,
daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole
from that hour.

9:23. And when Jesus was come into the house of the ruler, and saw the
minstrels and the multitude making a rout,

9:24. He said: Give place, for the girl is not dead, but sleepeth. And
they laughed him to scorn.

9:25. And when the multitude was put forth, he went in, and took her by
the hand. And the maid arose.

9:26. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that country.

9:27. And as Jesus passed from thence, there followed him two blind men
crying out and saying, Have mercy on us, O Son of David.

9:28. And when he was come to the house, the blind men came to him. And
Jesus saith to them, Do you believe, that I can do this unto you? They
say to him, Yea, Lord.

9:29. Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith, be
it done unto you.

9:30. And their eyes were opened, and Jesus strictly charged them,
saying, See that no man know this.

9:31. But they going out, spread his fame abroad in all that country.

9:32. And when they were gone out, behold they brought him a dumb man,
possessed with a devil.

9:33. And after the devil was cast out, the dumb man spoke, and the
multitudes wondered, saying, Never was the like seen in Israel.

9:34. But the Pharisees said, By the prince of devils he casteth out
devils.

9:35. And Jesus went about all the cities and towns, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
disease, and every infirmity.

9:36. And seeing the multitudes, he had compassion on them: because
they were distressed, and lying like sheep that have no shepherd.

9:37. Then he saith to his disciples, The harvest indeed is great, but
the labourers are few.

9:38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth
labourers into his harvest.


Matthew Chapter 10

Christ sends out his twelve apostles, with the power of miracles. The
lessons he gives them.

10:1. And having called his twelve disciples together, he gave them
power over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
diseases, and all manner of infirmities.

10:2. And the names of the twelve Apostles are these: The first, Simon
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother,

10:3. James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, Philip and
Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the publican, and James the son of
Alpheus, and Thaddeus,

10:4. Simon the Cananean, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

10:5. These twelve Jesus sent: commanding them, saying: Go ye not into
the way of the Gentiles, and into the city of the Samaritans enter ye
not.

10:6. But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

10:7. And going, preach, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand.

10:8. Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out
devils: freely have you received, freely give.

10:9. Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses:

10:10. Nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor a
staff; for the workman is worthy of his meat.

10:11. And into whatsoever city or town you shall enter, inquire who in
it is worthy, and there abide till you go thence.

10:12. And when you come into the house, salute it, saying: Peace be to
this house.

10:13. And if that house be worthy, your peace shall come upon it; but
if it be not worthy, your peace shall return to you.

10:14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words: going
forth out of that house or city shake off the dust from your feet.

10:15. Amen I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

10:16. Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye
therefore wise as serpents and simple as doves.

Simple.... That is, harmless, plain, sincere, and without guile.

10:17. But beware of men. For they will deliver you up in councils, and
they will scourge you in their synagogues.

10:18. And you shall be brought before governors, and before kings for
my sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles:

10:19. But when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what
to speak: for it shall be given you in that hour what to speak:

10:20. For it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that
speaketh in you.

10:21. The brother also shall deliver up the brother to death, and the
father the son; and the children shall rise up against their parents,
and shall put them to death.

10:22. And you shall be hated by all men for my name’s sake: but he
that shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved.

10:23. And when they shall persecute you in this city, flee into
another. Amen I say to you, you shall not finish all the cities of
Israel, till the Son of man come.

10:24. The disciple is not above the master, nor the servant above his
lord.

10:25. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
servant as his lord. If they have called the good man of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?

10:26. Therefore fear them not. For nothing is covered that shall not
be revealed: nor hid, that shall not be known.

10:27. That which I tell you in the dark, speak ye in the light: and
that which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the housetops.

10:28. And fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to
kill the soul: but rather fear him that can destroy both soul and body
in hell.

10:29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and not one of them
shall fall on the ground without your Father.

10:30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

10:31. Fear not therefore: better are you than many sparrows.

10:32. Every one therefore that shall confess me before men, I will
also confess him before my Father who is in heaven.

10:33. But he that shall deny me before men, I will also deny him
before my Father who is in heaven.

10:34. Do not think that I came to send peace upon earth: I came not to
send peace, but the sword.

10:35. For I came to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother
in law.

I came to set a man at variance, etc.... Not that this was the end or
design of the coming of our Saviour; but that his coming and his
doctrine would have this effect, by reason of the obstinate resistance
that many would make, and of their persecuting all such as should
adhere to him.

10:36. And a man’s enemies shall be they of his own household.

10:37. He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of
me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of
me.

10:38. And he that taketh not up his cross, and followeth me, is not
worthy of me.

10:39. He that findeth his life, shall lose it: and he that shall lose
his life for me, shall find it.

10:40. He that receiveth you, receiveth me: and he that receiveth me,
receiveth him that sent me.

10:41. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
receive the reward of a prophet: and he that receiveth a just man in
the name of a just man, shall receive the reward of a just man.

10:42. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a
cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, amen I say to you he
shall not lose his reward.


Matthew Chapter 11

John sends his disciples to Christ, who upbraids the Jews for their
incredulity, and calls to him such as are sensible of their burdens.

11:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his
twelve disciples, he passed from thence, to teach and to preach in
their cities.

11:2. Now when John had heard in prison the works of Christ: sending
two of his disciples he said to him:

11:3. Art thou he that art to come, or look we for another?

11:4. And Jesus making answer said to them: Go and relate to John what
you have heard and seen.

11:5. The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf
hear, the dead rise again, the poor have the gospel preached to them.

11:6. And blessed is he that shall not be scandalized in me.

Scandalized in me.... That is, who shall not take occasion of scandal
or offence from my humility, and the disgraceful death of the cross
which I shall endure.

11:7. And when they went their way, Jesus began to say to the
multitudes concerning John: What went you out into the desert to see? a
reed shaken with the wind?

11:8. But what went you out to see? a man clothed in soft garments?
Behold they that are clothed in soft garments, are in the houses of
kings.

11:9. But what went you out to see? A prophet? Yea I tell you, and more
than a prophet.

11:10. For this is he of whom it is written: Behold I send my angel
before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.

11:11. Amen I say to you, there hath not risen among them that are born
of women a greater than John the Baptist: yet he that is the lesser in
the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

11:12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent bear it away.

Suffereth violence, etc.... It is not to be obtained but by main force,
by using violence upon ourselves, by mortification and penance, and
resisting our perverse inclinations.

11:13. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John:

11:14. And if you will receive it, he is Elias that is to come.

He is Elias, etc.... Not in person, but in spirit. St. Luke 1. 17.

11:15. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

11:16. But whereunto shall I esteem this generation to be like? It is
like to children sitting in the market place.

11:17. Who crying to their companions say: We have piped to you, and
you have not danced: we have lamented, and you have not mourned.

11:18. For John came neither eating nor drinking; and they say: He hath
a devil.

11:19. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say: Behold a
man that is a glutton and a wine drinker, a friend of publicans and
sinners. And wisdom is justified by her children.

11:20. Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein were done the most
of his miracles, for that they had not done penance.

11:21. Woe to thee, Corozain, woe to thee, Bethsaida: for if in Tyre
and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in you,
they had long ago done penance in sackcloth and ashes.

11:22. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you.

11:23. And thou Capharnaum, shalt thou be exalted up to heaven? thou
shalt go down even unto hell. For if in Sodom had been wrought the
miracles that have been wrought in thee, perhaps it had remained unto
this day.

11:24. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.

11:25. At that time Jesus answered and said: I confess to thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to little ones.

11:26. Yea, Father: for so hath it seemed good in thy sight.

11:27. All things are delivered to me by my Father. And no one knoweth
the Son but the Father: neither doth any one know the Father, but the
Son, and he to whom it shall please the Son to reveal him.

11:28. Come to me all you that labor and are burdened, and I will
refresh you.

11:29. Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I am meek,
and humble of heart: And you shall find rest to your souls.

11:30. For my yoke is sweet and my burden light.


Matthew Chapter 12

Christ reproves the blindness of the Pharisees, and confutes their
attributing his miracles to Satan.

12:1. At that time Jesus went through the corn on the sabbath: and his
disciples being hungry, began to pluck the ears, and to eat.

12:2. And the Pharisees seeing them, said to him: Behold thy disciples
do that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days.

12:3. But he said to them: Have you not read what David did when he was
hungry, and they that were with him:

12:4. How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the loaves of
proposition, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for them that
were with him, but for the priests only?

The loaves of proposition.... So were called the twelve loaves which
were placed before the sanctuary in the temple of God.

12:5. Or have ye not read in the law, that on the sabbath days the
priests in the temple break the sabbath, and are without blame?

12:6. But I tell you that there is here a greater than the temple.

12:7. And if you knew what this meaneth: I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: you would never have condemned the innocent.

12:8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath.

12:9. And when he had passed from thence, he came into their
synagogues.

12:10. And behold there was a man who had a withered hand, and they
asked him, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they
might accuse him.

12:11. But he said to them: What man shall there be among you, that
hath one sheep: and if the same fall into a pit on the sabbath day,
will he not take hold on it and lift it up?

12:12. How much better is a man than a sheep? Therefore it is lawful to
do a good deed on the sabbath days.

12:13. Then he saith to the man: Stretch forth thy hand; and he
stretched it forth, and it was restored to health even as the other.

12:14. And the Pharisees going out made a consultation against him, how
they might destroy him.

12:15. But Jesus knowing it, retired from thence: and many followed
him, and he healed them all.

12:16. And he charged them that they should not make him known.

12:17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the
prophet, saying:

12:18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul
hath been well pleased. I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall
shew judgment to the Gentiles.

12:19. He shall not contend, nor cry out, neither shall any man hear
his voice in the streets.

12:20. The bruised reed he shall not break: and smoking flax he shall
not extinguish: till he send forth judgment unto victory.

12:21. And in his name the Gentiles shall hope.

12:22. Then was offered to him one possessed with a devil, blind and
dumb: and he healed him, so that he spoke and saw.

12:23. And all the multitudes were amazed, and said: Is not this the
son of David?

12:24. But the Pharisees hearing it, said: This man casteth not out
devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.

12:25. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom
divided against itself shall be made desolate: and every city or house
divided against itself shall not stand.

12:26. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how
then shall his kingdom stand?

12:27. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children
cast them out? Therefore they shall be your judges.

12:28. But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils, then is the
kingdom of God come upon you.

12:29. Or how can any one enter into the house of the strong, and rifle
his goods, unless he first bind the strong? and then he will rifle his
house.

12:30. He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathereth not
with me, scattereth.

12:31. Therefore I say to you: Every sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be forgiven.

The blasphemy of the Spirit.... The sin here spoken of is that
blasphemy, by which the Pharisees attributed the miracles of Christ,
wrought by the Spirit of God, to Beelzebub the prince of devils. Now
this kind of sin is usually accompanied with so much obstinacy, and
such wilful opposing the Spirit of God, and the known truth, that men
who are guilty of it, are seldom or never converted: and therefore are
never forgiven, because they will not repent. Otherwise there is no
sin, which God cannot or will not forgive to such as sincerely repent,
and have recourse to the keys of the church.

12:32. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him: but he that shall speak against the Holy Ghost,
it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to
come.

Nor in the world to come.... From these words St. Augustine (De Civ.
Dei, lib. 21, c. 13) and St. Gregory (Dialog., 4, c. 39) gather, that
some sins may be remitted in the world to come; and, consequently, that
there is a purgatory or a middle place.

12:33. Either make the tree good and its fruit good: or make the tree
evil, and its fruit evil. For by the fruit the tree is known.

12:34. O generation of vipers, how can you speak good things, whereas
you are evil? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.

12:35. A good man out of a good treasure bringeth forth good things:
and an evil man out of an evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.

12:36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall render an account for it in the day of judgment.

Every idle word.... This shews there must be a place of temporal
punishment hereafter where these slighter faults shall be punished.

12:37. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

12:38. Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying:
Master, we would see a sign from thee.

A sign.... That is, a miracle from heaven. St. Luke 11. 16.

12:39. Who answering said to them: An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh a sign: and a sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas
the prophet.

12:40. For as Jonas was in the whale’s belly three days and three
nights: so shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth three days
and three nights.

Three days, etc.... Not complete days and nights; but part of three
days, and three nights taken according to the way that the Hebrews
counted their days and nights, viz., from evening to evening.

12:41. The men of Ninive shall rise in judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: because they did penance at the preaching of
Jonas. And behold a greater than Jonas here.

12:42. The queen of the south shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: because she came from the ends of the
earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon
here.

12:43. And when an unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walketh
through dry places seeking rest, and findeth none.

12:44. Then he saith: I will return into my house from whence I came
out. And coming he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.

12:45. Then he goeth, and taketh with him seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last
state of that man is made worse than the first. So shall it be also to
this wicked generation.

12:46. As he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold his mother and
his brethren stood without, seeking to speak to him.

12:47. And one said unto him: Behold thy mother and thy brethren stand
without, seeking thee.

12:48. But he answering him that told him, said: Who is my mother, and
who are my brethren?

Who is my mother?.... This was not spoken by way of slighting his
mother, but to shew that we are never to suffer ourselves to be taken
from the service of God, by any inordinate affection to our earthly
parents: and that which our Lord chiefly regarded in his mother, was
her doing the will of his Father in heaven. It may also further allude
to the reprobation of the Jews, his carnal kindred, and the election of
the Gentiles.

12:49. And stretching forth his hand towards his disciples, he said:
Behold my mother and my brethren.

12:50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father, that is in heaven,
he is my brother, and sister, and mother.


Matthew Chapter 13

The parables of the sower and the cockle: of the mustardseed, etc.

13:1. The same day Jesus going out of the house, sat by the sea side.

13:2. And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he
went up into a boat and sat: and all the multitude stood on the shore.

13:3. And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying: Behold the
sower went forth to sow.

13:4. And whilst he soweth some fell by the way side, and the birds of
the air came and ate them up.

13:5. And other some fell upon stony ground, where they had not much
earth: and they sprung up immediately, because they had no deepness of
earth.

13:6. And when the sun was up they were scorched: and because they had
not root, they withered away.

13:7. And others fell among thorns: and the thorns grew up and choked
them.

13:8. And others fell upon good ground: and they brought forth fruit,
some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold.

13:9. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:10. And his disciples came and said to him: Why speakest thou to
them in parables?

13:11. Who answered and said to them: Because to you it is given to
know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: but to them it is not
given.

13:12. For he that hath, to him shall be given, and he shall abound:
but he that hath not, from him shall be taken away that also which he
hath.

13:13. Therefore do I speak to them in parables: because seeing they
see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

13:14. And the prophecy of Isaias is fulfilled in them, who saith: By
hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand: and seeing you shall
see, and shall not perceive.

13:15. For the heart of this people is grown gross, and with their ears
they have been dull of hearing, and their eyes they have shut: lest at
any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.

13:16. But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears,
because they hear.

13:17. For, amen, I say to you, many prophets and just men have desired
to see the things that you see, and have not seen them: and to hear the
things that you hear and have not heard them.

13:18. Hear you therefore the parable of the sower.

13:19. When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth
it not, there cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was
sown in his heart: this is he that received the seed by the way side.

13:20. And he that received the seed upon stony ground, is he that
heareth the word, and immediately receiveth it with joy.

13:21. Yet hath he not root in himself, but is only for a time: and
when there ariseth tribulation and persecution because of the word, he
is presently scandalized.

13:22. And he that received the seed among thorns, is he that heareth
the word, and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of riches
choketh up the word, and he becometh fruitless.

13:23. But he that received the seed upon good ground, is he that
heareth the word, and understandeth, and beareth fruit, and yieldeth
the one an hundredfold, and another sixty, and another thirty.

13:24. Another parable he proposed to them, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is likened to a man that sowed good seed in his field.

13:25. But while men were asleep, his enemy came and oversowed cockle
among the wheat and went his way.

13:26. And when the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth fruit,
then appeared also the cockle.

13:27. And the servants of the good man of the house coming said to
him. Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? Whence then hath
it cockle?

13:28. And he said to them: An enemy hath done this. And the servants
said to him: Wilt thou that we go and gather it up?

13:29. And he said: No, lest perhaps gathering up the cockle, you root
up the wheat also together with it.

13:30. Suffer both to grow until the harvest, and in the time of the
harvest I will say to the reapers: Gather up first the cockle, and bind
it into bundles to burn, but the wheat gather ye into my barn.

13:31. Another parable he proposed unto them, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed
in his field.

13:32. Which is the least indeed of all seeds; but when it is grown up,
it is greater than all herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of
the air come, and dwell in the branches thereof.

13:33. Another parable he spoke to them: The kingdom of heaven is like
to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until
the whole was leavened.

13:34. All these things Jesus spoke in parables to the multitudes: and
without parables he did not speak to them.

13:35. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
saying: I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden
from the foundation of the world.

13:36. Then having sent away the multitudes, he came into the house,
and his disciples came to him, saying: Expound to us the parable of the
cockle of the field.

13:37. Who made answer and said to them: He that soweth the good seed
is the Son of man.

13:38. And the field is the world. And the good seed are the children
of the kingdom. And the cockle are the children of the wicked one.

13:39. And the enemy that sowed them, is the devil. But the harvest is
the end of the world. And the reapers are the angels.

13:40. Even as cockle therefore is gathered up, and burnt with fire: so
shall it be at the end of the world.

13:41. The Son of man shall send his angels, and they shall gather out
of his kingdom all scandals, and them that work iniquity.

13:42. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

13:43. Then shall the just shine as the sun, in the kingdom of their
Father. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:44. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in a field.
Which a man having found, hid it, and for joy thereof goeth, and
selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

13:45. Again the kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant seeking good
pearls.

13:46. Who when he had found one pearl of great price, went his way,
and sold all that he had, and bought it.

13:47. Again the kingdom of heaven is like to a net cast into the sea,
and gathering together of all kinds of fishes.

13:48. Which, when it was filled, they drew out, and sitting by the
shore, they chose out the good into vessels, but the bad they cast
forth.

13:49. So shall it be at the end of the world. The angels shall go out,
and shall separate the wicked from among the just.

13:50. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

13:51. Have ye understood all these things? They say to him: Yes.

13:52. He said unto them: Therefore every scribe instructed in the
kingdom of heaven, is like to a man that is a householder, who bringeth
forth out of his treasure new things and old.

13:53. And it came to pass: when Jesus had finished these parables, he
passed from thence.

13:54. And coming into his own country, he taught them in their
synagogues, so that they wondered and said: How came this man by this
wisdom and miracles?

13:55. Is not this the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary,
and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Jude:

His brethren.... These were the children of Mary the wife of Cleophas,
sister to our Blessed Lady, (St. Matt. 27. 56; St. John 19. 25,) and
therefore, according to the usual style of the Scripture, they were
called brethren, that is, near relations to our Saviour.

13:56. And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence therefore hath
he all these things?

13:57. And they were scandalized in his regard. But Jesus said to them:
A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his
own house.

13:58. And he wrought not many miracles there, because of their
unbelief.


Matthew Chapter 14

Herod puts John to death. Christ feeds five thousand in the desert. He
walks upon the sea, and heals all the diseased with the touch of his
garment.

14:1. At that time Herod the Tetrarch heard the fame of Jesus.

Tetrarch.... This word, derived from the Greek, signifies one that
rules over the fourth part of a kingdom: as Herod then ruled over
Galilee, which was but the fourth part of the kingdom of his father.

14:2. And he said to his servants: This is John the Baptist: he is
risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works shew forth themselves
in him.

14:3. For Herod had apprehended John and bound him, and put him into
prison, because of Herodias, his brother’s wife.

14:4. For John said to him: It is not lawful for thee to have her.

14:5. And having a mind to put him to death, he feared the people:
because they esteemed him as a prophet.

14:6. But on Herod’s birthday, the daughter of Herodias danced before
them: and pleased Herod.

14:7. Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her whatsoever she
would ask of him.

14:8. But she being instructed before by her mother, said: Give me here
in a dish the head of John the Baptist.

14:9. And the king was struck sad: yet because of his oath, and for
them that sat with him at table, he commanded it to be given.

14:10. And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.

14:11. And his head was brought in a dish: and it was given to the
damsel, and she brought it to her mother.

14:12. And his disciples came and took the body, and buried it, and
came and told Jesus.

14:13. Which when Jesus had heard, he retired from thence by a boat,
into a desert place apart, and the multitudes having heard of it,
followed him on foot out of the cities.

14:14. And he coming forth saw a great multitude, and had compassion on
them, and healed their sick.

14:15. And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying: This
is a desert place, and the hour is now passed: send away the
multitudes, that going into the towns, they may buy themselves
victuals.

14:16. But Jesus said to them, They have no need to go: give you them
to eat.

14:17. They answered him: We have not here, but five loaves, and two
fishes.

14:18. Who said to them: Bring them hither to me.

14:19. And when he had commanded the multitude to sit down upon the
grass, he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to
heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples,
and the disciples to the multitudes.

14:20. And they did all eat, and were filled. And they took up what
remained, twelve full baskets of fragments.

14:21. And the number of them that did eat, was five thousand men,
besides women and children.

14:22. And forthwith Jesus obliged his disciples to go up into the
boat, and to go before him over the water, till he dismissed the
people.

14:23. And having dismissed the multitude, he went into a mountain
alone to pray. And when it was evening, he was there alone.

14:24. But the boat in the midst of the sea was tossed with the waves:
for the wind was contrary.

14:25. And in the fourth watch of the night, he came to them walking
upon the sea.

14:26. And they seeing him walking upon the sea, were troubled, saying:
It is an apparition. And they cried out for fear.

14:27. And immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying: Be of good heart:
it is I, fear ye not.

14:28. And Peter making answer, said: Lord, if it be thou, bid me come
to thee upon the waters.

14:29. And he said: Come. And Peter going down out of the boat walked
upon the water to come to Jesus.

14:30. But seeing the wind strong, he was afraid: and when he began to
sink, he cried out, saying: Lord, save me.

14:31. And immediately Jesus stretching forth his hand took hold of
him, and said to him: O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?

14:32. And when they were come up into the boat, the wind ceased.

14:33. And they that were in the boat came and adored him, saying:
Indeed thou art the Son of God.

14:34. And having passed the water, they came into the country of
Genesar.

14:35. And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent
into all that country, and brought to him all that were diseased.

14:36. And they besought him that they might touch but the hem of his
garment. And as many as touched, were made whole.


Matthew Chapter 15

Christ reproves the Scribes. He cures the daughter of the woman of
Canaan: and many others: and feeds four thousand with seven loaves.

15:1. Then came to him from Jerusalem scribes and Pharisees, saying:

15:2. Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the ancients?
For they wash not their hands when they eat bread.

15:3. But he answering, said to them: Why do you also transgress the
commandment of God for your tradition? For God said:

15:4. Honour thy father and mother: And: He that shall curse father or
mother, let him die the death.

15:5. But you say: Whosoever shall say to father or mother, The gift
whatsoever proceedeth from me, shall profit thee.

The gift, etc.... That is, the offering that I shall make to God, shall
be instead of that which should be expended for thy profit. This
tradition of the Pharisees was calculated to enrich themselves; by
exempting children from giving any further assistance to their parents,
if they once offered to the temple and the priests, that which should
have been the support of their parents. But this was a violation of the
law of God, and of nature, which our Saviour here condemns.

15:6. And he shall not honour his father or his mother: and you have
made void the commandment of God for your tradition.

15:7. Hypocrites, well hath Isaias prophesied of you, saying:

15:8. This people honoureth me with their lips: but their heart is far
from me.

15:9. And in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines and
commandments of men.

Commandments of men.... The doctrines and commandments here reprehended
are such as are either contrary to the law of God, (as that of
neglecting parents, under pretence of giving to God,) or at least are
frivolous, unprofitable, and no ways conducing to true piety, as that
of often washing hands, etc., without regard to the purity of the
heart. But as to the rules and ordinances of the holy church, touching
fasts, festivals, etc., these are no ways repugnant to, but highly
agreeable to God’s holy word, and all Christian piety: neither are they
to be counted among the doctrines and commandments of men; because they
proceed not from mere human authority; but from that which Christ has
established in his church; whose pastors he has commanded us to hear
and obey, even as himself. St. Luke 10. 16; St. Matt. 18. 17.

15:10. And having called together the multitudes unto him, he said to
them: Hear ye and understand.

15:11. Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man: but what
cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.

Not that which goeth into, etc.... No uncleanness in meat, nor any dirt
contracted by eating it with unwashed hands, can defile the soul: but
sin alone; or a disobedience of the heart to the ordinance and will of
God. And thus when Adam took the forbidden fruit, it was not the apple,
which entered into the mouth, but the disobedience to the law of God
which defiled him. The same is to be said if a Jew, in the time of the
old law, had eaten swine’s flesh; or a Christian convert, in the days
of the apostles, contrary to their ordinance, had eaten blood; or if
any of the faithful at present should transgress the ordinance of God’s
church, by breaking the fasts: for in all these cases the soul would be
defiled; not indeed by that which goeth into the mouth; but by the
disobedience of the heart, in wilfully transgressing the ordinance of
God, or of those who have their authority from him.

15:12. Then came his disciples, and said to him: Dost thou know that
the Pharisees, when they heard this word, were scandalized?

15:13. But he answering, said: Every plant which my heavenly Father
hath not planted, shall be rooted up.

15:14. Let them alone: they are blind, and leaders of the blind. And if
the blind lead the blind, both fall into the pit.

15:15. And Peter answering, said to him: Expound to us this parable.

15:16. But he said: Are you also yet without understanding?

15:17. Do you not understand, that whatsoever entereth into the mouth,
goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the privy?

15:18. But the things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from
the heart, and those things defile a man.

15:19. For from the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.

15:20. These are the things that defile a man. But to eat with unwashed
hands doth not defile a man.

15:21. And Jesus went from thence, and retired into the coasts of Tyre
and Sidon.

15:22. And behold a woman of Canaan who came out of those coasts,
crying out, said to him: Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David:
my daughter is grievously troubled by a devil.

15:23. Who answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought
him, saying: Send her away, for she crieth after us:

15:24. And he answering, said: I was not sent but to the sheep, that
are lost of the house of Israel.

15:25. But she came and adored him, saying: Lord, help me.

15:26. Who answering, said: It is not good to take the bread of the
children, and to cast it to the dogs.

15:27. But she said: Yea, Lord; for the whelps also eat of the crumbs
that fall from the table of their masters.

15:28. Then Jesus answering, said to her: O woman, great is thy faith:
be it done to thee as thou wilt: and her daughter was cured from that
hour.

15:29. And when Jesus had passed away from thence, he came nigh the sea
of Galilee: and going up into a mountain, he sat there.

15:30. And there came to him great multitudes, having with them the
dumb, the blind, the lame, the maimed, and many others: and they cast
them down at his feet, and he healed them:

15:31. So that the multitudes marvelled seeing the dumb speak, the lame
walk, the blind see: and they glorified the God of Israel.

15:32. And Jesus called together his disciples, and said: I have
compassion on the multitudes, because they continue with me now three
days, and have not what to eat, and I will not send them away fasting,
lest they faint in the way.

15:33. And the disciples say unto him: Whence then should we have so
many loaves in the desert, as to fill so great a multitude?

15:34. And Jesus said to them: How many loaves have you? But they said:
Seven, and a few little fishes.

15:35. And he commanded the multitude to sit down upon the ground.

15:36. And taking the seven loaves and the fishes, and giving thanks,
he brake, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples gave to the
people.

15:37. And they did all eat, and had their fill. And they took up seven
baskets full, of what remained of the fragments.

15:38. And they that did eat, were four thousand men, beside children
and women.

15:39. And having dismissed the multitude, he went up into a boat, and
came into the coasts of Magedan.


Matthew Chapter 16

Christ refuses to shew the Pharisees a sign from heaven. Peter’s
confession is rewarded. He is rebuked for opposing Christ’s passion.
All his followers must deny themselves.

16:1. And there came to him the Pharisees and Sadducees tempting: and
they asked him to shew them a sign from heaven.

16:2. But he answered and said to them: When it is evening, you say, It
will be fair weather, for the sky is red.

16:3. And in the morning: To day there will be a storm, for the sky is
red and lowering. You know then how to discern the face of the sky: and
can you not know the signs of the times?

16:4. A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign: and a
sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. And he
left them, and went away.

16:5. And when his disciples were come over the water, they had
forgotten to take bread.

16:6. Who said to them: Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees.

16:7. But they thought within themselves, saying: Because we have taken
no bread.

16:8. And Jesus knowing it, said: Why do you think within yourselves, O
ye of little faith, for that you have no bread?

16:9. Do you not yet understand, neither do you remember the five
loaves among five thousand men, and how many baskets you took up?

16:10. Nor the seven loaves, among four thousand men, and how many
baskets you took up?

16:11. Why do you not understand that it was not concerning bread I
said to you: Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?

16:12. Then they understood that he said not that they should beware of
the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and
Sadducees.

16:13. And Jesus came into the quarters of Cesarea Philippi: and he
asked his disciples, saying: Whom do men say that the Son of man is?

16:14. But they said: Some John the Baptist, and other some Elias, and
others Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

16:15. Jesus saith to them: But whom do you say that I am?

16:16. Simon Peter answered and said: Thou art Christ, the Son of the
living God.

16:17. And Jesus answering said to him: Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-Jona: because flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my
Father who is in heaven.

16:18. And I say to thee: That thou art Peter; and upon this rock I
will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it.

Thou art Peter, etc.... As St. Peter, by divine revelation, here made a
solemn profession of his faith of the divinity of Christ; so in
recompense of this faith and profession, our Lord here declares to him
the dignity to which he is pleased to raise him: viz., that he to whom
he had already given the name of Peter, signifying a rock, St. John 1.
42, should be a rock indeed, of invincible strength, for the support of
the building of the church; in which building he should be, next to
Christ himself, the chief foundation stone, in quality of chief pastor,
ruler, and governor; and should have accordingly all fulness of
ecclesiastical power, signified by the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
Upon this rock, etc.... The words of Christ to Peter, spoken in the
vulgar language of the Jews which our Lord made use of, were the same
as if he had said in English, Thou art a Rock, and upon this rock I
will build my church. So that, by the plain course of the words, Peter
is here declared to be the rock, upon which the church was to be built:
Christ himself being both the principal foundation and founder of the
same. Where also note, that Christ, by building his house, that is, his
church, upon a rock, has thereby secured it against all storms and
floods, like the wise builder, St. Matt. 7. 24, 25. The gates of hell,
etc.... That is, the powers of darkness, and whatever Satan can do,
either by himself, or his agents. For as the church is here likened to
a house, or fortress, built on a rock; so the adverse powers are
likened to a contrary house or fortress, the gates of which, that is,
the whole strength, and all the efforts it can make, will never be able
to prevail over the city or church of Christ. By this promise we are
fully assured, that neither idolatry, heresy, nor any pernicious error
whatsoever shall at any time prevail over the church of Christ.

16:19. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And
whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in
heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, it shall be loosed
also in heaven.

Loose on earth.... The loosing the bands of temporal punishments due to
sins, is called an indulgence; the power of which is here granted.

16:20. Then he commanded his disciples, that they should tell no one
that he was Jesus the Christ.

16:21. From that time Jesus began to shew to his disciples, that he
must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the ancients and
scribes and chief priests, and be put to death, and the third day rise
again.

16:22. And Peter taking him, began to rebuke him, saying: Lord, be it
far from thee, this shall not be unto thee.

And Peter taking him.... That is, taking him aside, out of a tender
love, respect and zeal for his Lord and Master’s honour, began to
expostulate with him, as it were to rebuke him, saying, Lord, far be it
from thee to suffer death; but the Lord said to Peter, ver. 23, Go
behind me, Satan. These words may signify, Begone from me; but the holy
Fathers expound them otherwise, that is, come after me, or follow me;
and by these words the Lord would have Peter to follow him in his
suffering, and not to oppose the divine will by contradiction; for the
word satan means in Hebrew an adversary, or one that opposes.

16:23. Who turning, said to Peter: Go behind me, Satan, thou art a
scandal unto me: because thou savourest not the things that are of God,
but the things that are of men.

16:24. Then Jesus said to his disciples: If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

16:25. For he that will save his life, shall lose it: and he that shall
lose his life for my sake, shall find it.

16:26. For what doth it profit a man, if he gain the whole world and
suffer the loss of his own soul? Or what exchange shall a man give for
his soul?

16:27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with
his angels: and then will he render to every man according to his
works.

16:28. Amen I say to you, there are some of them that stand here, that
shall not taste death, till they see the Son of man coming in his
kingdom.


Matthew Chapter 17

The Transfiguration of Christ: He cures the lunatic child: foretells
his passion; and pays the didrachma.

17:1. And after six days Jesus taketh unto him Peter and James, and
John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart:

17:2. And he was transfigured before them. And his face did shine as
the sun: and his garments became white as snow.

17:3. And behold there appeared to them Moses and Elias talking with
him.

17:4. And Peter answering, said to Jesus: Lord, it is good for us to be
here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles, one for thee,
and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

17:5. And as he was yet speaking, behold a bright cloud overshadowed
them. And lo a voice out of the cloud, saying: This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased: hear ye him.

17:6. And the disciples hearing fell upon their face, and were very
much afraid.

17:7. And Jesus came and touched them: and said to them: Arise, and
fear not.

17:8. And they lifting up their eyes, saw no one, but only Jesus.

17:9. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them,
saying: Tell the vision to no man, till the Son of man be risen from
the dead.

17:10. And his disciples asked him, saying: Why then do the scribes say
that Elias must come first?

17:11. But he answering, said to them: Elias indeed shall come, and
restore all things.

17:12. But I say to you, that Elias is already come, and they knew him
not, But have done unto him whatsoever they had a mind. So also the Son
of man shall suffer from them.

17:13. Then the disciples understood, that he had spoken to them of
John the Baptist.

17:14. And when he was come to the multitude, there came to him a man
falling down on his knees before him saying: Lord, have pity on my son,
for he is a lunatic, and suffereth much: for he falleth often into the
fire, and often into the water.

17:15. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

17:16. Then Jesus answered and said: O unbelieving and perverse
generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you?
Bring him hither to me.

17:17. And Jesus rebuked him, and the devil went out of him, and the
child was cured from that hour.

17:18. Then came the disciples to Jesus secretly, and said: Why could
not we cast him out?

17:19. Jesus said to them: Because of your unbelief. For, amen I say to
you, if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you shall say to
this mountain: Remove from hence hither, and it shall remove: and
nothing shall be impossible to you.

As a grain of mustard seed.... That is, a perfect faith; which in its
properties, and its fruits, resembles the grain of mustard seed, in the
parable, chap. 13. 31.

17:20. But this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting.

17:21. And when they abode together in Galilee, Jesus said to them: The
Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men:

17:22. And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise again.
And they were troubled exceedingly.

17:23. And when they were come to Capharnaum, they that received the
didrachmas, came to Peter, and said to him: Doth not your master pay
the didrachma?

The didrachmas.... A didrachma was half a sicle, or half a stater; that
is, about 15d. English: which was a tax laid upon every head for the
service of the temple.

17:24. He said: Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus
prevented him, saying: What is thy opinion, Simon? The kings of the
earth, of whom do they receive tribute or custom, of their own
children, or of strangers?

17:25. And he said: Of strangers. Jesus said to him: Then the children
are free.

17:26. But that we may not scandalize them, go to the sea, and cast in
a hook: and that fish which shall first come up, take: and when thou
hast opened its mouth, thou shalt find a stater: take that, and give it
to them for me and thee.


Matthew Chapter 18

Christ teaches humility, to beware of scandal, and to flee the
occasions of sin: to denounce to the church incorrigible sinners, and
to look upon such as refuse to hear the church as heathens. He promises
to his disciples the power of binding and loosing: and that he will be
in the midst of their assemblies. No forgiveness for them that will not
forgive.

18:1. At that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying: Who, thinkest
thou, is the greater in the kingdom of heaven?

18:2. And Jesus, calling unto him a little child, set him in the midst
of them.

18:3. And said: amen I say to you, unless you be converted, and become
as little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

18:4. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he
is the greater in the kingdom of heaven.

18:5. And he that shall receive one such little child in my name,
receiveth me.

18:6. But he that shall scandalize one of these little ones that
believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone should be hanged
about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the depth of the sea.

Shall scandalize.... That is, shall put a stumblingblock in their way,
and cause them to fall into sin.

18:7. Woe to the world because of scandals. For it must needs be that
scandals come: but nevertheless woe to that man by whom the scandal
cometh.

It must needs be, etc.... Viz., considering the wickedness and
corruption of the world.

18:8. And if thy hand, or thy foot, scandalize thee, cut it off, and
cast it from thee. It is better for thee to go into life maimed or
lame, than having two hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting
fire.

Scandalize thee.... That is, cause thee to offend.

18:9. And if thy eye scandalize thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee. It is better for thee having one eye to enter into life, than
having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

18:10. See that you despise not one of these little ones: for I say to
you, that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father who
is in heaven.

18:11. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

18:12. What think you? If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them
should go astray: doth he not leave the ninety-nine in the mountains,
and go to seek that which is gone astray?

18:13. And if it so be that he find it: Amen I say to you, he rejoiceth
more for that, than for the ninety-nine that went not astray.

18:14. Even so it is not the will of your Father, who is in heaven,
that one of these little ones should perish.

18:15. But if thy brother shall offend against thee, go, and rebuke him
between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou shalt gain thy
brother.

18:16. And if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two more:
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may stand.

18:17. And if he will not hear them: tell the church. And if he will
not hear the church, let him be to thee as the heathen and publican.

18:18. Amen I say to you, whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, shall
be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth,
shall be loosed also in heaven.

18:19. Again I say to you, that if two of you shall consent upon earth,
concerning anything whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to them
by my Father who is in heaven.

18:20. For where there are two or three gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.

There am I in the midst of them.... This is understood of such
assemblies only as are gathered in the name and authority of Christ;
and in unity of the church of Christ. St. Cyprian, De Unitate
Ecclesiae.

18:21. Then came Peter unto him and said: Lord, how often shall my
brother offend against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

18:22. Jesus saith to him: I say not to thee, till seven times; but
till seventy times seven times.

18:23. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened to a king, who would
take an account of his servants.

18:24. And when he had begun to take the account, one was brought to
him, that owed him ten thousand talents.

Talents.... A talent was seven hundred and fifty ounces of silver,
which at the rate of five shillings to the ounce is a hundred and
eighty-seven pounds ten shillings sterling.

18:25. And as he had not wherewith to pay it, his lord commanded that
he should be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and
payment to be made.

18:26. But that servant falling down, besought him, saying: Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

18:27. And the lord of that servant being moved with pity, let him go
and forgave him the debt.

18:28. But when that servant was gone out, he found one of his
fellow-servants that owed him an hundred pence: and laying hold of him,
he throttled him, saying: Pay what thou owest.

Pence.... The Roman penny was the eighth part of an ounce, that is,
about sevenpence half-penny English.

18:29. And his fellow-servant falling down, besought him, saying: Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

18:30. And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he
paid the debt.

18:31. Now his fellow servants seeing what was done, were very much
grieved, and they came, and told their lord all that was done.

18:32. Then his lord called him: and said to him: Thou wicked servant,
I forgave thee all the debt, because thou besoughtest me:

18:33. Shouldst not thou then have had compassion also on thy fellow
servant, even as I had compassion on thee?

18:34. And his lord being angry, delivered him to the torturers until
he paid all the debt.

18:35. So also shall my heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not
every one his brother from your hearts.


Matthew Chapter 19

Christ declares matrimony to be indissoluble: he recommends the making
one’s self an eunuch for the kingdom of heaven; and parting with all
things for him. He shews the danger of riches, and the reward of
leaving all to follow him.

19:1. And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these words, he departed
from Galilee and came into the coasts of Judea, beyond Jordan.

19:2. And great multitudes followed him: and he healed them there.

19:3. And there came to him the Pharisees tempting him, saying: Is
it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

19:4. Who answering, said to them: Have ye not read, that he who made
man from the beginning, made them male and female? And he said:

19:5. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife, and they two shall be in one flesh.

19:6. Therefore now they are not two, but one flesh. What therefore God
hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

19:7. They say to him: Why then did Moses command to give a bill of
divorce, and to put away?

19:8. He saith to them: Because Moses by reason of the hardness of your
heart permitted you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it
was not so.

19:9. And I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, except
it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery:
and he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth adultery.

Except it be, etc.... In the case of fornication, that is, of adultery,
the wife may be put away: but even then the husband cannot marry
another as long as the wife is living.

19:10. His disciples say unto him: If the case of a man with his wife
be so, it is not expedient to marry.

19:11. Who said to them: All men take not this word, but they to whom
it is given.

All men take not this word.... That is, all receive not the gift of
living singly and chastely, unless they pray for the grace of God to
enable them to live so, and for some it may be necessary to that end to
fast as well as pray: and to those it is given from above.

19:12. For there are eunuchs, who were born so from their mother’s
womb: and there are eunuchs, who were made so by men: and there are
eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven. He
that can take, let him take it.

There are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs, for the kingdom of
heaven.... This text is not to be taken in the literal sense; but
means, that there are such, who have taken a firm and commendable
resolution of leading a single and chaste life, in order to serve God
in a more perfect state than those who marry: as St. Paul clearly
shews. 1 Cor. 7. 37, 38.

19:13. Then were little children presented to him, that he should
impose hands upon them and pray. And the disciples rebuked them.

19:14. But Jesus said to them: Suffer the little children, and forbid
them not to come to me: for the kingdom of heaven is for such.

19:15. And when he had imposed hands upon them, he departed from
thence.

19:16. And behold one came and said to him: Good master, what good
shall I do that I may have life everlasting?

19:17. Who said to him: Why askest thou me concerning good? One is
good, God. But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.

19:18. He said to him: Which? And Jesus said: Thou shalt do no murder,
Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not
bear false witness.

19:19. Honour thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself.

19:20. The young man saith to him: All these have I kept from my youth,
what is yet wanting to me?

19:21. Jesus saith to him: If thou wilt be perfect, go sell what thou
hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and
come, follow me.

19:22. And when the young man had heard this word, he went away sad:
for he had great possessions.

19:23. Then Jesus said to his disciples: Amen, I say to you, that a
rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

19:24. And again I say to you: It is easier for a camel to pass through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

19:25. And when they had heard this, the disciples wondered much,
saying: Who then can be saved?

19:26. And Jesus beholding, said to them: With men this is impossible:
but with God all things are possible.

19:27. Then Peter answering, said to him: Behold we have left all
things, and have followed thee: what therefore shall we have?

19:28. And Jesus said to them: Amen I say to you, that you who have
followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the
seat of his majesty, you also shall sit on twelve seats judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.

19:29. And every one that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my name’s sake,
shall receive an hundredfold, and shall possess life everlasting.

19:30. And many that are first, shall be last: and the last shall be
first.


Matthew Chapter 20

The parable of the labourers in the vineyard. The ambition of the two
sons of Zebedee. Christ gives sight to two blind men.

20:1. The kingdom of heaven is like to an householder, who went out
early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.

20:2. And having agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent
them into his vineyard.

20:3. And going out about the third hour, he saw others standing in the
marketplace idle.

20:4. And he said to them: Go you also into my vineyard, and I will
give you what shall be just.

20:5. And they went their way. And again he went out about the sixth
and the ninth hour, and did in like manner.

20:6. But about the eleventh hour he went out and found others
standing, and he saith to them: Why stand you here all the day idle?

20:7. They say to him: Because no man hath hired us. He saith to them:
Go ye also into my vineyard.

20:8. And when evening was come, the lord of the vineyard saith to his
steward: Call the labourers and pay them their hire, beginning from the
last even to the first.

20:9. When therefore they were come that came about the eleventh hour,
they received every man a penny.

20:10. But when the first also came, they thought that they should
receive more: And they also received every man a penny.

20:11. And receiving it they murmured against the master of the house,

20:12. Saying: These last have worked but one hour, and thou hast made
them equal to us, that have borne the burden of the day and the heats.

20:13. But he answering said to one of them: friend, I do thee no
wrong: didst thou not agree with me for a penny?

20:14. Take what is thine, and go thy way: I will also give to this
last even as to thee.

20:15. Or, is it not lawful for me to do what I will? Is thy eye evil,
because I am good?

What I will.... Viz., with my own, and in matters that depend on my own
bounty.

20:16. So shall the last be first and the first last. For many are
called but few chosen.

20:17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart
and said to them:

20:18. Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
betrayed to the chief priests and the scribes: and they shall condemn
him to death.

20:19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to be mocked and scourged
and crucified: and the third day he shall rise again.

20:20. Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her
sons, adoring and asking something of him.

20:21. Who said to her: What wilt thou? She saith to him: say that
these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on
thy left, in thy kingdom.

20:22. And Jesus answering, said: You know not what you ask. Can you
drink the chalice that I shall drink? They say to him: We can.

20:23. He saith to them: My chalice indeed you shall drink; but to sit
on my right or left hand is not mine to give to you, but to them for
whom it is prepared by my Father.

20:24. And the ten, hearing it, were moved with indignation against the
two brethren.

20:25. But Jesus called them to him and said: You know that the princes
of the Gentiles lord it over them; and that they that are the greater,
exercise power upon them.

20:26. It shall not be so among you: but whosoever is the greater among
you, let him be your minister.

20:27. And he that will be first among you shall be your servant.

20:28. Even as the Son of man is not come to be ministered unto, but to
minister and to give his life a redemption for many.

20:29. And when they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed
him.

20:30. And behold two blind men sitting by the way side heard that
Jesus passed by. And they cried out, saying: O Lord, thou son of David,
have mercy on us.

20:31. And the multitude rebuked them that they should hold their
peace. But they cried out the more, saying: O Lord, thou son of David,
have mercy on us.

20:32. And Jesus stood and called them and said: What will ye that I do
to you?

20:33. They say to him: Lord, that our eyes be opened.

20:34. And Jesus having compassion on them, touched their eyes. And
immediately they saw and followed him.


Matthew Chapter 21

Christ rides into Jerusalem upon an ass. He casts the buyers and
sellers out of the temple, curses the fig tree and puts to silence the
priests and scribes.

21:1. And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem and were come to Bethphage,
unto mount Olivet, then Jesus sent two disciples,

21:2. Saying to them: Go ye into the village that is over against you:
and immediately you shall find an ass tied and a colt with her. Loose
them and bring them to me.

21:3. And if any man shall say anything to you, say ye that the Lord
hath need of them. And forthwith he will let them go.

21:4. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the prophet, saying:

21:5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion: Behold thy king cometh to thee,
meek and sitting upon an ass and a colt, the foal of her that is used
to the yoke.

21:6. And the disciples going, did as Jesus commanded them.

21:7. And they brought the ass and the colt and laid their garments
upon them and made him sit thereon.

21:8. And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way: and
others cut boughs from the trees and strewed them in the way.

21:9. And the multitudes that went before and that followed cried,
saying: Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

21:10. And when he was come into Jerusalem, the whole city was moved,
saying: Who is this?

21:11. And the people said: This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth of
Galilee.

21:12. And Jesus went into the temple of God and cast out all them that
sold and bought in the temple and overthrew the tables of the money
changers and the chairs of them that sold doves.

21:13. And he saith to them: It is written, My house shall be called
the house of prayer; but you have made it a den of thieves.

21:14. And there came to him the blind and the lame in the temple: and
he healed them.

21:15. And the chief priests and scribes, seeing the wonderful things
that he did and the children crying in the temple and saying: Hosanna
to the son of David, were moved with indignation,

21:16. And said to him: Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus said to
them: Yea, have you never read: Out of the mouth of infants and of
sucklings thou hast perfected praise?

21:17. And leaving them, he went out of the city into Bethania and
remained there.

21:18. And in the morning, returning into the city, he was hungry.

21:19. And seeing a certain fig tree by the way side, he came to it and
found nothing on it but leaves only. And he saith to it: May no fruit
grow on thee henceforward for ever. And immediately the fig tree
withered away.

21:20. And the disciples seeing it wondered, saying: How is it
presently withered away?

21:21. And Jesus answering, said to them: Amen, I say to you, if you
shall have faith and stagger not, not only this of the fig tree shall
you do, but also if you shall say to this mountain, Take up and cast
thyself into the sea, it shall be done.

21:22. And all things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer believing, you
shall receive.

21:23. And when he was come into the temple, there came to him, as he
was teaching, the chief priests and ancients of the people, saying: By
what authority dost thou these things? And who hath given thee this
authority?

21:24. Jesus answering, said to them: I also will ask you one word,
which if you shall tell me, I will also tell you by what authority I do
these things.

21:25. The baptism of John, whence was it? From heaven or from men? But
they thought within themselves, saying:

21:26. If we shall say, from heaven, he will say to us: Why then did
you not believe him? But if we shall say, from men, we are afraid of
the multitude: for all held John as a prophet.

21:27. And answering Jesus, they said: We know not. He also said to
them: Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

21:28. But what think you? A certain man had two sons: and coming to
the first, he said: Son, go work to day in my vineyard.

21:29. And he answering, said: I will not. But afterwards, being moved
with repentance, he went.

21:30. And coming to the other, he said in like manner. And he
answering said: I go, Sir. And he went not.

21:31. Which of the two did the father’s will? They say to him: The
first. Jesus saith to them: Amen I say to you that the publicans and
the harlots shall go into the kingdom of God before you.

21:32. For John came to you in the way of justice: and you did not
believe him. But the publicans and the harlots believed him: but you,
seeing it, did not even afterwards repent, that you might believe him.

21:33. Hear ye another parable. There was a man, an householder, who
planted a vineyard and made a hedge round about it and dug in it a
press and built a tower and let it out to husbandmen and went into a
strange country.

21:34. And when the time of the fruits drew nigh, he sent his servants
to the husbandmen that they might receive the fruits thereof.

21:35. And the husbandmen laying hands on his servants, beat one and
killed another and stoned another.

21:36. Again he sent other servants, more than the former; and they did
to them in like manner.

21:37. And last of all he sent to them his son, saying: They will
reverence my son.

21:38. But the husbandmen seeing the son, said among themselves: This
is the heir: come, let us kill him, and we shall have his inheritance.

21:39. And taking him, they cast him forth out of the vineyard and
killed him.

21:40. When therefore the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will he
do to those husbandmen?

21:41. They say to him: He will bring those evil men to an evil end and
will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen that shall render him the
fruit in due season.

21:42. Jesus saith to them: Have you never read in the Scriptures: The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner? By the Lord this has been done; and it is wonderful in our
eyes.

21:43. Therefore I say to you that the kingdom of God shall be taken
from you and shall be given to a nation yielding the fruits thereof.

21:44. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder.

21:45. And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables,
they knew that he spoke of them.

21:46. And seeking to lay hands on him, they feared the multitudes,
because they held him as a prophet.


Matthew Chapter 22

The parable of the marriage feast. Christ orders tribute to be paid to
Caesar. He confutes the Sadducees, shews which is the first commandment
in the law and puzzles the Pharisees.

22:1. And Jesus answering, spoke again in parables to them, saying:

22:2. The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who made a marriage
for his son.

22:3. And he sent his servants to call them that were invited to the
marriage: and they would not come.

22:4. Again he sent other servants, saying: Tell them that were
invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my beeves and fatlings are
killed, and all things are ready. Come ye to the marriage.

22:5. But they neglected and went their ways, one to his farm and
another to his merchandise.

22:6. And the rest laid hands on his servants and, having treated them
contumeliously, put them to death.

22:7. But when the king had heard of it, he was angry: and sending his
armies, he destroyed those murderers and burnt their city.

22:8. Then he saith to his servants: The marriage indeed is ready; but
they that were invited were not worthy.

22:9. Go ye therefore into the highways; and as many as you shall find,
call to the marriage.

22:10. And his servants going forth into the ways, gathered together
all that they found, both bad and good: and the marriage was filled
with guests.

22:11. And the king went in to see the guests: and he saw there a man
who had not on a wedding garment.

22:12. And he saith to him: Friend, how camest thou in hither not
having on a wedding garment? But he was silent.

22:13. Then the king said to the waiters: Bind his hands and feet, and
cast him into the exterior darkness. There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

22:14. For many are called, but few are chosen.

22:15. Then the Pharisees going, consulted among themselves how to
insnare him in his speech.

22:16. And they sent to him their disciples with the Herodians, saying:
Master, we know that thou art a true speaker and teachest the way of
God in truth. Neither carest thou for any man: for thou dost not regard
the person of men.

The Herodians.... That is, some that belonged to Herod, and that joined
with him in standing up for the necessity of paying tribute to Caesar,
that is, to the Roman emperor. Some are of opinion that there was a
sect among the Jews called Herodians, from their maintaining that Herod
was the Messias.

22:17. Tell us therefore what dost thou think? Is it lawful to give
tribute to Caesar, or not?

22:18. But Jesus knowing their wickedness, said: Why do you tempt me,
ye hypocrites?

22:19. Shew me the coin of the tribute. And they offered him a penny.

22:20. And Jesus saith to them: Whose image and inscription is this?

22:21. They say to him: Caesar’s. Then he saith to them: Render
therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s; and to God, the
things that are God’s.

22:22. And hearing this, they wondered and, leaving him, went their
ways.

22:23. That day there came to him the Sadducees, who say there is no
resurrection; and asked him,

22:24. Saying: Master, Moses said: If a man die having no son, his
brother shall marry his wife and raise up issue to his brother.

22:25. Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first having
married a wife, died; and not having issue, left his wife to his
brother.

22:26. In like manner the second and the third and so on, to the
seventh.

22:27. And last of all the woman died also.

22:28. At the resurrection therefore, whose wife of the seven shall she
be? For they all had her.

22:29. And Jesus answering, said to them: You err, not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God.

22:30. For in the resurrection they shall neither marry nor be married,
but shall be as the angels of God in heaven.

22:31. And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read
that which was spoken by God, saying to you:

22:32. I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of
Jacob? He is not the God of the dead but of the living.

22:33. And the multitudes hearing it were in admiration at his
doctrine.

22:34. But the Pharisees, hearing that he had silenced the Sadducees,
came together.

22:35. And one of them, a doctor of the law, asked him, tempting him:

22:36. Master, which is the great commandment in the law?

22:37. Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
whole heart and with thy whole soul and with thy whole mind.

22:38. This is the greatest and the first commandment.

22:39. And the second is like to this: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.

22:40. On these two commandments dependeth the whole law and the
prophets.

22:41. And the Pharisees being gathered together, Jesus asked them,

22:42. Saying: What think you of Christ? Whose son is he? They say to
him: David’s.

22:43. He saith to them: How then doth David in spirit call him Lord,
saying:

22:44. The Lord said to my Lord: Sit on my right hand, until I make thy
enemies thy footstool?

22:45. If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?

22:46. And no man was able to answer him a word: neither durst any man
from that day forth ask him any more questions.


Matthew Chapter 23

Christ admonishes the people to follow the good doctrine, not the bad
example of the scribes and Pharisees. He warns his disciples not to
imitate their ambition and denounces divers woes against them for their
hypocrisy and blindness.

23:1. Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples,

23:2. Saying: The scribes and the Pharisees have sitten on the chair of
Moses.

23:3. All things therefore whatsoever they shall say to you, observe
and do: but according to their works do ye not. For they say, and do
not.

23:4. For they bind heavy and insupportable burdens and lay them on
men’s shoulders: but with a finger of their own they will not move
them.

23:5. And all their works they do for to be seen of men. For they make
their phylacteries broad and enlarge their fringes.

Phylacteries.... that is, parchments, on which they wrote the ten
commandments, and carried them on their foreheads before their eyes:
which the Pharisees affected to wear broader than other men; so to seem
more zealous for the law.

23:6. And they love the first places at feasts and the first chairs in
the synagogues,

23:7. And salutations in the market place, and to be called by men,
Rabbi.

23:8. But be not you called Rabbi. For one is your master: and all you
are brethren.

23:9. And call none your father upon earth; for one is your father, who
is in heaven.

Call none your father—Neither be ye called masters, etc.... The meaning
is that our Father in heaven is incomparably more to be regarded, than
any father upon earth: and no master to be followed, who would lead us
away from Christ. But this does not hinder but that we are by the law
of God to have a due respect both for our parents and spiritual
fathers, (1 Cor. 4. 23:15,) and for our masters and teachers.

23:10. Neither be ye called masters: for one is your master, Christ.

23:11. He that is the greatest among you shall be your servant.

23:12. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled: and he that
shall humble himself shall be exalted.

23:13. But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you
shut the kingdom of heaven against men: for you yourselves do not enter
in and those that are going in, you suffer not to enter.

23:14. Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you devour
the houses of widows, praying long prayers. For this you shall receive
the greater judgment.

23:15. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you go
round about the sea and the land to make one proselyte. And when he is
made, you make him the child of hell twofold more than yourselves.

23:16. Woe to you, blind guides, that say, Whosoever shall swear by the
temple, it is nothing; but he that shall swear by the gold of the
temple is a debtor.

23:17. Ye foolish and blind: for whether is greater, the gold or the
temple that sanctifieth the gold?

23:18. And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but
whosoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it is a debtor.

23:19. Ye blind: for whether is greater, the gift or the altar that
sanctifieth the gift?

23:20. He therefore that sweareth by the altar sweareth by it and by
all things that are upon it.

23:21. And whosoever shall swear by the temple sweareth by it and by
him that dwelleth in it.

23:22. And he that sweareth by heaven sweareth by the throne of God and
by him that sitteth thereon.

23:23. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you tithe
mint and anise and cummin and have left the weightier things of the
law: judgment and mercy and faith. These things you ought to have done
and not to leave those undone.

23:24. Blind guides, who strain out a gnat and swallow a camel.

23:25. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you make
clean the outside of the cup and of the dish, but within you are full
of rapine and uncleanness.

23:26. Thou blind Pharisee, first make clean the inside of the cup and
of the dish, that the outside may become clean.

23:27. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you are
like to whited sepulchres, which outwardly appear to men beautiful but
within are full of dead men’s bones and of all filthiness.

23:28. So you also outwardly indeed appear to men just: but inwardly
you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

23:29. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, that build the
sepulchres of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the just,

Build the sepulchres, etc.... This is not blamed, as if it were in
itself evil to build or adorn the monuments of the prophets: but the
hypocrisy of the Pharisees is here taxed; who, whilst they pretended to
honour the memory of the prophets, were persecuting even unto death the
Lord of the prophets.

23:30. And say: If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

23:31. Wherefore you are witnesses against yourselves, that you are the
sons of them that killed the prophets.

23:32. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

23:33. You serpents, generation of vipers, how will you flee from the
judgment of hell?

23:34. Therefore behold I send to you prophets and wise men and
scribes: and some of them you will put to death and crucify: and some
you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city.

23:35. That upon you may come all the just blood that hath been shed
upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the just, even unto the blood of
Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom you killed between the temple and
the altar.

That upon you may come, etc.... Not that they should suffer more than
their own sins justly deserved; but that the justice of God should now
fall upon them with such a final vengeance, once for all, as might
comprise all the different kinds of judgments and punishments, that had
at any time before been inflicted for the shedding of just blood.

23:36. Amen I say to you, all these things shall come upon this
generation.

23:37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest
them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered together
thy children, as the hen doth gather her chickens under her wings, and
thou wouldst not?

23:38. Behold, your house shall be left to you, desolate.

23:39. For I say to you, you shall not see me henceforth till you say:
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.


Matthew Chapter 24

Christ foretells the destruction of the temple, with the signs that
shall come before it and before the last judgment. We must always
watch.

24:1. And Jesus being come out of the temple, went away. And his
disciples came to shew him the buildings of the temple.

24:2. And he answering, said to them: Do you see all these things? Amen
I say to you, there shall not be left here a stone upon a stone that
shall not be destroyed.

24:3. And when he was sitting on mount Olivet, the disciples came to
him privately, saying: Tell us when shall these things be? And what
shall be the sign of thy coming and of the consummation of the world?

24:4. And Jesus answering, said to them: Take heed that no man seduce
you.

24:5. For many will come in my name saying, I am Christ. And they will
seduce many.

24:6. And you shall hear of wars and rumours of wars. See that ye be
not troubled. For these things must come to pass: but the end is not
yet.

24:7. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: And there shall be pestilences and famines and earthquakes in
places.

24:8. Now all these are the beginnings of sorrows.

24:9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted and shall put you
to death: and you shall be hated by all nations for my name’s sake.

24:10. And then shall many be scandalized and shall betray one another
and shall hate one another.

24:11. And many false prophets shall rise and shall seduce many.

24:12. And because iniquity hath abounded, the charity of many shall
grow cold.

24:13. But he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved.

24:14. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole
world, for a testimony to all nations: and then shall the consummation
come.

24:15. When therefore you shall see the abomination of desolation,
which was spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place:
he that readeth let him understand.

24:16. Then they that are in Judea, let them flee to the mountains:

24:17. And he that is on the housetop, let him not come down to take
any thing out of his house:

24:18. And he that is in the field, let him not go back to take his
coat.

24:19. And woe to them that are with child and that give suck in those
days.

24:20. But pray that your flight be not in the winter or on the
sabbath.

24:21. For there shall be then great tribulation, such as hath not been
from the beginning of the world until now, neither shall be.

24:22. And unless those days had been shortened, no flesh should be
saved: but for the sake of the elect those days shall be shortened.

24:23. Then if any man shall say to you, Lo here is Christ, or there:
do not believe him.

24:24. For there shall arise false Christs and false prophets and shall
shew great signs and wonders, insomuch as to deceive (if possible) even
the elect.

24:25. Behold I have told it to you, beforehand.

24:26. If therefore they shall say to you, Behold he is in the desert:
go ye not out. Behold he is in the closets: believe it not.

24:27. For as lightning cometh out of the east and appeareth even into
the west: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

24:28. Wheresoever the body shall be, there shall the eagles also be
gathered together.

Wheresoever, etc.... The coming of Christ shall be sudden, and manifest
to all the world, like lightning: and wheresoever he shall come,
thither shall all mankind be gathered to him, as eagles are gathered
about a dead body.

24:29. And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun
shall be darkened and the moon shall not give her light and the stars
shall fall from heaven and the powers of heaven shall be moved.

The stars.... Or flaming meteors resembling stars.

24:30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven. And
then shall all tribes of the earth mourn: and they shall see the Son of
man coming in the clouds of heaven with much power and majesty.

The sign, etc.... The cross of Christ.

24:31. And he shall send his angels with a trumpet and a great voice:
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the
farthest parts of the heavens to the utmost bounds of them.

24:32. And from the fig tree learn a parable: When the branch thereof
is now tender and the leaves come forth, you know that summer is nigh.

24:33. So you also, when you shall see all these things, know ye that
it is nigh, even at the doors.

24:34. Amen I say to you that this generation shall not pass till all
these things be done.

24:35. Heaven and earth shall pass: but my words shall not pass.

Shall pass.... Because they shall be changed at the end of the world
into a new heaven and new earth.

24:36. But of that day and hour no one knoweth: no, not the angels of
heaven, but the Father alone.

24:37. And as in the days of Noe, so shall also the coming of the Son
of man be.

24:38. For, as in the days before the flood they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, even till that day in which
Noe entered into the ark:

24:39. And they knew not till the flood came and took them all away: so
also shall the coming of the Son of man be.

24:40. Then two shall be in the field. One shall be taken and one shall
be left.

24:41. Two women shall be grinding at the mill. One shall be taken and
one shall be left.

24:42. Watch ye therefore, because you know not what hour your Lord
will come.

24:43. But this know ye, that, if the goodman of the house knew at what
hour the thief would come, he would certainly watch and would not
suffer his house to be broken open.

24:44. Wherefore be you also ready, because at what hour you know not
the Son of man will come.

24:45. Who, thinkest thou, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his
lord hath appointed over his family, to give them meat in season?

24:46. Blessed is that servant, whom when his lord shall come he shall
find so doing.

24:47. Amen I say to you: he shall place him over all his goods.

24:48. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart: My lord is long
a coming:

24:49. And shall begin to strike his fellow servants and shall eat and
drink with drunkards:

24:50. The lord of that servant shall come in a day that he hopeth not
and at an hour that he knoweth not:

24:51. And shall separate him and appoint his portion with the
hypocrites. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.


Matthew Chapter 25

The parable of the ten virgins and of the talents. The description of
the last judgment.

25:1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be like to ten virgins, who
taking their lamps went out to meet the bridegroom and the bride.

25:2. And five of them were foolish and five wise.

25:3. But the five foolish, having taken their lamps, did not take oil
with them.

25:4. But the wise took oil in their vessels with the lamps.

25:5. And the bridegroom tarrying, they all slumbered and slept.

25:6. And at midnight there was a cry made: Behold the bridegroom
cometh. Go ye forth to meet him.

25:7. Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.

25:8. And the foolish said to the wise: Give us of your oil, for our
lamps are gone out.

25:9. The wise answered, saying: Lest perhaps there be not enough for
us and for you, go ye rather to them that sell and buy for yourselves.

25:10. Now whilst they went to buy the bridegroom came: and they that
were ready went in with him to the marriage. And the door was shut.

25:11. But at last came also the other virgins, saying: Lord, Lord,
open to us.

25:12. But he answering said: Amen I say to you, I know you not.

25:13. Watch ye therefore, because you know not the day nor the hour.

25:14. For even as a man going into a far country called his servants
and delivered to them his goods;

25:15. And to one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to
another one, to every one according to his proper ability: and
immediately he took his journey.

25:16. And he that had received the five talents went his way and
traded with the same and gained other five.

25:17. And in like manner he that had received the two gained other
two.

25:18. But he that had received the one, going his way, digged into the
earth and hid his lord’s money.

25:19. But after a long time the lord of those servants came and
reckoned with them.

25:20. And he that had received the five talents coming, brought other
five talents, saying: Lord, thou didst deliver to me five talents.
Behold I have gained other five over and above.

25:21. His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant,
because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee
over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:22. And he also that had received the two talents came and said:
Lord, thou deliveredst two talents to me. Behold I have gained other
two.

25:23. His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant:
because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee
over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:24. But he that had received the one talent, came and said: Lord, I
know that thou art a hard man; thou reapest where thou hast not sown
and gatherest where thou hast not strewed.

25:25. And being afraid, I went and hid thy talent in the earth. Behold
here thou hast that which is thine.

25:26. And his lord answering, said to him: Wicked and slothful
servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sow not and gather where I
have not strewed.

25:27. Thou oughtest therefore to have committed my money to the
bankers: and at my coming I should have received my own with usury.

25:28. Take ye away therefore the talent from him and give it him that
hath ten talents.

25:29. For to every one that hath shall be given, and he shall abound:
but from him that hath not, that also which he seemeth to have shall be
taken away.

25:30. And the unprofitable servant, cast ye out into the exterior
darkness. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

25:31. And when the Son of man shall come in his majesty, and all the
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the seat of his majesty.

25:32. And all nations shall be gathered together before him: and he
shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the
sheep from the goats:

25:33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on
his left.

25:34. Then shall the king say to them that shall be on his right hand:
Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world.

25:35. For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat: I was thirsty, and you
gave me to drink: I was a stranger, and you took me in:

25:36. Naked, and you covered me: sick, and you visited me: I was in
prison, and you came to me.

25:37. Then shall the just answer him, saying: Lord, when did we see
thee hungry and fed thee: thirsty and gave thee drink?

25:38. Or when did we see thee a stranger and took thee in? Or naked
and covered thee?

25:39. Or when did we see thee sick or in prison and came to thee?

25:40. And the king answering shall say to them: Amen I say to you, as
long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did it to me.

25:41. Then he shall say to them also that shall be on his left hand:
Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting fire, which was prepared
for the devil and his angels.

25:42. For I was hungry and you gave me not to eat: I was thirsty and
you gave me not to drink.

25:43. I was a stranger and you took me not in: naked and you covered
me not: sick and in prison and you did not visit me.

25:44. Then they also shall answer him, saying: Lord, when did we see
thee hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and
did not minister to thee?

25:45. Then he shall answer them, saying: Amen: I say to you, as long
as you did it not to one of these least, neither did you do it to me.

25:46. And these shall go into everlasting punishment: but the just,
into life everlasting.


Matthew Chapter 26

The Jews conspire against Christ. He is anointed by Mary. The treason
of Judas. The last supper. The prayer in the garden. The apprehension
of our Lord. His treatment in the house of Caiphas.

26:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended all these words, he
said to his disciples:

26:2. You know that after two days shall be the pasch: and the Son of
man shall be delivered up to be crucified.

26:3. Then were gathered together the chief priests and ancients of the
people, into the court of the high priest, who was called Caiphas:

26:4. And they consulted together that by subtilty they might apprehend
Jesus and put him to death.

26:5. But they said: Not on the festival day, lest perhaps there should
be a tumult among the people.

26:6. And when Jesus was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper,

26:7. There came to him a woman having an alabaster box of precious
ointment and poured it on his head as he was at table.

26:8. And the disciples seeing it had indignation, saying: To what
purpose is this waste?

26:9. For this might have been sold for much and given to the poor.

26:10. And Jesus knowing it, said to them: Why do you trouble this
woman? For she hath wrought a good work upon me.

26:11. For the poor you have always with you: but me you have not
always.

Me you have not always.... Viz., in a visible manner, as when
conversant here on earth; and as we have the poor, whom we may daily
assist and relieve.

26:12. For she in pouring this ointment on my body hath done it for my
burial.

26:13. Amen I say to you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in
the whole world, that also which she hath done shall be told for a
memory of her.

26:14. Then went one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, to
the chief priests.

26:15. And said to them: What will you give me, and I will deliver him
unto you? But they appointed him thirty pieces of silver.

26:16. And from thenceforth he sought opportunity to betray him.

26:17. And on the first day of the Azymes, the disciples came to Jesus,
saying: Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the pasch?

Azymes.... Feast of the unleavened bread. Pasch.... The paschal lamb.

26:18. But Jesus said: Go ye into the city to a certain man and say to
him: The master saith, My time is near at hand. With thee I make the
pasch with my disciples.

26:19. And the disciples did as Jesus appointed to them: and they
prepared the pasch.

26:20. But when it was evening, he sat down with his twelve disciples.

26:21. And whilst they were eating, he said: Amen I say to you that one
of you is about to betray me.

26:22. And they being very much troubled began every one to say: Is it
I, Lord?

26:23. But he answering said: He that dippeth his hand with me in the
dish, he shall betray me.

26:24. The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him. But woe to
that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed. It were better for
him, if that man had not been born.

26:25. And Judas that betrayed him answering, said: Is it I, Rabbi? He
saith to him: Thou hast said it.

26:26. And whilst they were at supper, Jesus took bread and blessed and
broke and gave to his disciples and said: Take ye and eat. This is my
body.

This is my body.... He does not say, This is the figure of my body—but
This is my body. (2 Council of Nice, Act. 6.) Neither does he say in
this, or with this is my body; but absolutely, This is my body: which
plainly implies transubstantiation.

26:27. And taking the chalice, he gave thanks and gave to them, saying:
Drink ye all of this.

Drink ye all of this.... This was spoken to the twelve apostles; who
were the all then present; and they all drank of it, says St. Mark 14.
23. But it no ways follows from these words spoken to the apostles,
that all the faithful are here commanded to drink of the chalice; any
more than that all the faithful are commanded to consecrate, offer and
administer this sacrament; because Christ upon this same occasion, and
at the same time, bid the apostles do so; in these words, St. Luke 22.
19, Do this for a commemoration of me.

26:28. For this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed
for many unto remission of sins.

Blood of the new testament.... As the old testament was dedicated with
the blood of victims, by Moses, in these words: This is the blood of
the testament, etc., Heb. 9. 20; so here is the dedication and
institution of the new testament, in the blood of Christ, here
mystically shed by these words: This is the blood of the new testament,
etc.

26:29. And I say to you, I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit
of the vine until that day when I shall drink it with you new in the
kingdom of my Father.

Fruit of the vine.... These words, by the account of St. Luke 26:22.
18, were not spoken of the sacramental cup, but of the wine that was
drunk with the paschal lamb. Though the sacramental cup might also be
called the fruit of the vine, because it was consecrated from wine, and
retains the likeness, and all the accidents or qualities of wine.

26:30. And a hymn being said, they went out unto mount Olivet.

26:31. Then Jesus saith to them: All you shall be scandalized in me
this night. For it is written: I will strike the shepherd: and the
sheep of the flock shall be dispersed.

Scandalized in me, etc.... Forasmuch as my being apprehended shall make
you all run away and forsake me.

26:32. But after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
Galilee.

26:33. And Peter answering, said to him: Although all shall be
scandalized in thee, I will never be scandalized.

26:34. Jesus said to him: Amen I say to thee that in this night before
the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.

26:35. Peter saith to him: Yea, though I should die with thee, I will
not deny thee. And in like manner said all the disciples.

26:36. Then Jesus came with them into a country place which is called
Gethsemani. And he said to his disciples: Sit you here, till I go
yonder and pray.

26:37. And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began
to grow sorrowful and to be sad.

26:38. Then he saith to them: My soul is sorrowful even unto death.
Stay you here and watch with me.

26:39. And going a little further, he fell upon his face, praying and
saying: My Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me.
Nevertheless, not as I will but as thou wilt.

26:40. And he cometh to his disciples and findeth them asleep. And he
saith to Peter: What? Could you not watch one hour with me?

26:41. Watch ye: and pray that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh weak.

26:42. Again the second time, he went and prayed, saying: My Father, if
this chalice may not pass away, but I must drink it, thy will be done.

26:43. And he cometh again and findeth them sleeping: for their eyes
were heavy.

26:44. And leaving them, he went again: and he prayed the third time,
saying the selfsame word.

26:45. Then he cometh to his disciples and said to them: Sleep ye now
and take your rest. Behold the hour is at hand: and the Son of man
shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

26:46. Rise: let us go. Behold he is at hand that will betray me.

26:47. As he yet spoke, behold Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with
him a great multitude with swords and clubs, sent from the chief
priests and the ancients of the people.

26:48. And he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying: Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that is he. Hold him fast.

26:49. And forthwith coming to Jesus, he said: Hail, Rabbi. And he
kissed him.

26:50. And Jesus said to him: Friend, whereto art thou come? Then they
came up and laid hands on Jesus and held him.

26:51. And behold one of them that were with Jesus, stretching forth
his hand, drew out his sword: and striking the servant of the high
priest, cut off his ear.

26:52. Then Jesus saith to him: Put up again thy sword into its place:
for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

26:53. Thinkest thou that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me
presently more than twelve legions of angels?

26:54. How then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that so it must be
done?

26:55. In that same hour, Jesus said to the multitudes: You are come
out, as it were to a robber, with swords and clubs to apprehend me. I
sat daily with you, teaching in the temple: and you laid not hands on
me.

26:56. Now all this was done that the scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled. Then the disciples, all leaving him, fled.

26:57. But they holding Jesus led him to Caiphas the high priest, where
the scribes and the ancients were assembled.

26:58. And Peter followed him afar off, even to the court of the high
priest, And going in, he sat with the servants, that he might see the
end.

26:59. And the chief priests and the whole council sought false witness
against Jesus, that they might put him to death.

26:60. And they found not, whereas many false witnesses had come in.
And last of all there came two false witnesses:

26:61. And they said: This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of
God and after three days to rebuild it.

26:62. And the high priest rising up, said to him: Answerest thou
nothing to the things which these witness against thee?

26:63. But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest said to him: I
adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us if thou be the Christ
the Son of God.

26:64. Jesus saith to him: Thou hast said it. Nevertheless I say to
you, hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand
of the power of God and coming in the clouds of heaven.

26:65. Then the high priest rent his garments, saying: He hath
blasphemed: What further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now you
have heard the blasphemy.

26:66. What think you? But they answering, said: He is guilty of death.

26:67. Then did they spit in his face and buffeted him. And others
struck his face with the palms of their hands,

26:68. Saying: Prophesy unto us, O Christ. Who is he that struck thee?

26:69. But Peter sat without in the court. And there came to him a
servant maid, saying: Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilean.

26:70. But he denied before them all, saying: I know not what thou
sayest.

26:71. And as he went out of the gate, another maid saw him; and she
saith to them that were there: This man also was with Jesus of
Nazareth.

26:72. And again he denied with an oath: I know not the man.

26:73. And after a little while, they came that stood by and said to
Peter: Surely thou also art one of them. For even thy speech doth
discover thee.

26:74. Then he began to curse and to swear that he knew not the man.
And immediately the cock crew.

26:75. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus which he had said: Before
the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice. And going forth, he wept
bitterly.


Matthew Chapter 27

The continuation of the history of the passion of Christ. His death and
burial.

27:1. And when morning was come, all the chief priests and ancients of
the people took counsel against Jesus, that they might put him to
death.

27:2. And they brought him bound and delivered him to Pontius Pilate
the governor.

27:3. Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that he was condemned,
repenting himself, brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief priests and ancients,

27:4. Saying: I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. But they said:
What is that to us? Look thou to it.

27:5. And casting down the pieces of silver in the temple, he departed
and went and hanged himself with an halter.

27:6. But the chief priests having taken the pieces of silver, said: It
is not lawful to put them into the corbona, because it is the price of
blood.

Corbona.... A place in the temple where the people put in their gifts
or offerings.

27:7. And after they had consulted together, they bought with them the
potter’s field, to be a burying place for strangers.

27:8. For this cause that field was called Haceldama, that is, the
field of blood, even to this day.

27:9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
saying: And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him
that was prized, whom they prized of the children of Israel.

27:10. And they gave them unto the potter’s field, as the Lord
appointed to me.

27:11. And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him,
saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus saith to him: Thou sayest
it.

27:12. And when he was accused by the chief priests and ancients, he
answered nothing.

27:13. Then Pilate saith to him: Dost not thou hear how great
testimonies they allege against thee?

27:14. And he answered him to never a word, so that the governor
wondered exceedingly.

27:15. Now upon the solemn day the governor was accustomed to release
to the people one prisoner, whom they would.

27:16. And he had then a notorious prisoner that was called Barabbas.

27:17. They therefore being gathered together, Pilate said: Whom will
you that I release to You: Barabbas, or Jesus that is called Christ?

27:18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

27:19. And as he was sitting in the place of judgment, his wife sent to
him, saying: Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have
suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.

27:20. But the chief priests and ancients persuaded the people that
they should ask Barabbas and make Jesus away.

27:21. And the governor answering, said to them: Whether will you of
the two to be released unto you? But they said: Barabbas.

27:22. Pilate saith to them: What shall I do then with Jesus that is
called Christ? They say all: Let him be crucified.

27:23. The governor said to them: Why, what evil hath he done? But they
cried out the more, saying: Let him be crucified.

27:24. And Pilate seeing that he prevailed nothing, but that rather a
tumult was made, taking water washed his hands before the people,
saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just man. Look you to it.

27:25. And the whole people answering, said: His blood be upon us and
upon our children.

27:26. Then he released to them Barabbas: and having scourged Jesus,
delivered him unto them to be crucified.

27:27. Then the soldiers of the governor, taking Jesus into the hall,
gathered together unto him the whole band.

27:28. And stripping him, they put a scarlet cloak about him.

27:29. And platting a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a
reed in his right hand. And bowing the knee before him, they mocked
him, saying: Hail, King of the Jews.

27:30. And spitting upon him, they took the reed and struck his head.

27:31. And after they had mocked him, they took off the cloak from him
and put on him his own garments and led him away to crucify him.

27:32. And going out, they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon: him they
forced to take up his cross.

27:33. And they came to the place that is called Golgotha, which is the
place of Calvary.

27:34. And they gave him wine to drink mingled with gall. And when he
had tasted, he would not drink.

27:35. And after they had crucified him, they divided his garments,
casting lots; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet, saying: They divided my garments among them; and upon my
vesture they cast lots.

27:36. And they sat and watched him.

27:37. And they put over his head his cause written: THIS IS JESUS THE
KING OF THE JEWS.

27:38. Then were crucified with him two thieves: one on the right hand
and one on the left.

27:39. And they that passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads,

27:40. And saying: Vah, thou that destroyest the temple of God and in
three days dost rebuild it: save thy own self. If thou be the Son of
God, come down from the cross.

27:41. In like manner also the chief priests, with the scribes and
ancients, mocking said:

27:42. He saved others: himself he cannot save. If he be the king of
Israel, let him now come down from the cross: and we will believe him.

27:43. He trusted in God: let him now deliver him if he will have him.
For he said: I am the Son of God.

27:44. And the selfsame thing the thieves also that were crucified with
him reproached him with.

27:45. Now from the sixth hour, there was darkness over the whole
earth, until the ninth hour.

27:46. And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying:
Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani? That is, My God, My God, why hast thou
forsaken me?

27:47. And some that stood there and heard said: This man calleth
Elias.

27:48. And immediately one of them running took a sponge and filled it
with vinegar and put it on a reed and gave him to drink.

27:49. And the others said: Let be. Let us see whether Elias will come
to deliver him.

27:50. And Jesus again crying with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.

27:51. And behold the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top
even to the bottom: and the earth quaked and the rocks were rent.

27:52. And the graves were opened: and many bodies of the saints that
had slept arose,

27:53. And coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, came into
the holy city and appeared to many.

27:54. Now the centurion and they that were with him watching Jesus,
having seen the earthquake and the things that were done, were sore
afraid, saying: Indeed this was the Son of God.

27:55. And there were there many women afar off, who had followed Jesus
from Galilee, ministering unto him:

27:56. Among whom was Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of James and
Joseph and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

27:57. And when it was evening, there came a certain rich man of
Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of Jesus.

27:58. He went to Pilate and asked the body of Jesus. Then Pilate
commanded that the body should be delivered.

27:59. And Joseph taking the body wrapped it up in a clean linen cloth:

27:60. And laid it in his own new monument, which he had hewed out in a
rock. And he rolled a great stone to the door of the monument and went
his way.

27:61. And there was there Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, sitting
over against the sepulchre.

27:62. And the next day, which followed the day of preparation, the
chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate,

The day of preparation.... The eve of the sabbath; so called, because
on that day they prepared all things necessary; not being allowed so
much as to dress their meat on the sabbath day.

27:63. Saying: Sir, we have remembered, that that seducer said, while
he was yet alive: After three days I will rise again.

27:64. Command therefore the sepulchre to be guarded until the third
day: lest perhaps his disciples come and steal him away and say to the
people: He is risen from the dead. And the last error shall be worse
than the first.

27:65. Pilate saith to them: You have a guard. Go, guard it as you
know.

27:66. And they departing, made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone
and setting guards.


Matthew Chapter 28

The resurrection of Christ. His commission to his disciples.

28:1. And in the end of the sabbath, when it began to dawn towards the
first day of the week, came Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, to see
the sepulchre.

28:2. And behold there was a great earthquake. For an angel of the Lord
descended from heaven and coming rolled back the stone and sat upon it.

28:3. And his countenance was as lightning and his raiment as snow.

28:4. And for fear of him, the guards were struck with terror and
became as dead men.

28:5. And the angel answering, said to the women: Fear not you: for I
know that you seek Jesus who was crucified.

28:6. He is not here. For he is risen, as he said. Come, and see the
place where the Lord was laid.

28:7. And going quickly, tell ye his disciples that he is risen. And
behold he will go before you into Galilee. There you shall see him. Lo,
I have foretold it to you.

28:8. And they went out quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great
joy, running to tell his disciples.

28:9. And behold, Jesus met them, saying: All hail. But they came up
and took hold of his feet and adored him.

28:10. Then Jesus said to them: Fear not. Go, tell my brethren that
they go into Galilee. There they shall see me.

28:11. Who when they were departed, behold, some of the guards came
into the city and told the chief priests all things that had been done.

28:12. And they being assembled together with the ancients, taking
counsel, gave a great sum of money to the soldiers,

28:13. Saying: Say you, His disciples came by night and stole him away
when we were asleep.

28:14. And if the governor shall hear of this, we will persuade him and
secure you.

28:15. So they taking the money, did as they were taught: and this word
was spread abroad among the Jews even unto this day.

28:16. And the eleven disciples went into Galilee, unto the mountain
where Jesus had appointed them.

28:17. And seeing him they adored: but some doubted.

28:18. And Jesus coming, spoke to them, saying: All power is given to
me in heaven and in earth.

All power, etc.... See here the warrant and commission of the apostles
and their successors, the bishops and pastors of Christ’s church. He
received from his Father all power in heaven and in earth: and in
virtue of this power, he sends them (even as his Father sent him, St.
John 20. 21) to teach and disciple, not one, but all nations; and
instruct them in all truths: and that he may assist them effectually in
the execution of this commission, he promises to be with them, not for
three or four hundred years only, but all days, even to the
consummation of the world. How then could the Catholic Church ever go
astray; having always with her pastors, as is here promised, Christ
himself, who is the way, the truth, and the life. St. John 14.

28:19. Going therefore, teach ye all nations: baptizing them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

28:20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. And behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the
world.




